WHO 
MODE L  
FORMULARY  
 

2 0 0 8  
 
 

 

 

 
 

 



WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data : 
 
World Health Organization  
 
WHO model formulary 2008 / editors, Marc C. Stuart, Maria Kouimtzi, 
Suzanne R. Hill. 
 
1.Formularies - standards. 2. Essential drugs. 3. Pharmaceutical preparations 
-administration and  dosage. I.Stuart, Marc C. II.Kouimtzi, Maria. III.Hill, 
Suzanne. IV.Title. 
 
ISBN   978 92 4 154765 9  (NLM classification: QV 50) 
 
 
 

© World Health Organization 2009 
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained 
from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, 
Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: 
bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO 
publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be 
addressed to WHO Press, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; e-mail: 
permissions@who.int).  
 
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health 
Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on 
maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full 
agreement. 
 
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not 
imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in 
preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions 
excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters. 
 
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify 
the information contained in this publication.  However, the published material is being 
distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied.  The 
responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader.  In no 
event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.   
 
The named editors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this publication. 
 
Printed in Switzerland 
 

 



 

Editors  
Mark C. Stuart (1) 
Maria Kouimtzi (1) 
Suzanne R. Hill (2) 
 
1. British Medical Journal Group, London 
2. Department of Essential Medicines and Pharmaceutical Policies, World 
Health Organization, Geneva  
 

Acknowledgements  
Sincere thanks for their contributions and comments on the current edition of 
the WHO Model Formulary are due to the following individuals: at WHO, 
Jorge Alvar, Pilar Aparicio, Catherine d'Arcangues, Philippe Duclos, Olivier 
Fontaine, Ahmet Metin Gulmezoglu, Matthews Mathai, Shanthi Mendis, Peter 
Olumese, Shamin Ahmad Qazi, Mario Raviglione, Cathy Roth, Pere Simarro, 
and Marco Vitória; and at the Institut Pasteur, Belgium and the International 
Union of Immunological Societies, Ian Magrath.  
 
Special thanks are due to Sangeeta Kakar for her editorial assistance, to 
Monique Renevier, WHO, for updating and managing the database for the 
electronic edition, and to Jörg Hetzke, WHO, and Stéphane Louet for 
developing the web-based solution and database.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008  iii 



 

 

 

 

iv WHO Model Formulary 2008 



 

Contents 
 
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................vi 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................vii 
Changes to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines .........................................viii 
General advice to prescribers ..............................................................................................1 
Section 1: Anaesthetics ...............................................................................................15 
Section 2: Analgesics, antipyretics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines 

(NSAIMS), medicines used to treat gout and disease modifying 
agents in rheumatoid disorders (DMARDs) ........................................30 

Section 3: Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis .................................47 
Section 4: Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings ...........................55 
Section 5: Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics ...............................................................67 
Section 6: Anti-infective medicines ..........................................................................80 
Section 7: Antimigraine medicines..........................................................................214 
Section 8: Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in 

palliative care............................................................................................219 
Section 9: Antiparkinsonism medicines .................................................................241 
Section 10. Medicines affecting the blood...............................................................246 
Section 11: Blood products and plasma substitutes ..............................................256 
Section 12: Cardiovascular medicines.......................................................................262 
Section 13: Dermatological medicines (topical) .....................................................294 
Section 14: Diagnostic agents ....................................................................................313 
Section 15: Disinfectants and antiseptics.................................................................320 
Section 16: Diuretics....................................................................................................326 
Section 17: Gastrointestinal medicines.....................................................................335 
Section 18: Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives ............353 
Section 19: Immunologicals .......................................................................................392 
Section 20: Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase  

inhibitors ...................................................................................................425 
Section 21: Ophthalmological preparations ............................................................432 
Section 22: Oxytocics and antioxytocics..................................................................443 
Section 23: Peritoneal dialysis solution ....................................................................452 
Section 24: Psychotherapeutic medicines ................................................................454 
Section 25: Medicines acting on the respiratory tract............................................473 
Section 26: Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid-base  

disturbances..............................................................................................486 
Section 27: Vitamins and minerals ............................................................................494 
Appendix 1:  Interactions...............................................................................................503 
Appendix 2:  Pregnancy..................................................................................................582 
Appendix 3:  Breastfeeding............................................................................................599 
Appendix 4:  Renal impairment ....................................................................................611 
Appendix 5:  Hepatic impairment ................................................................................621 
Index ....................................................................................................................628 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 v 



 

Abbreviations 

ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme 
ADR adverse drug reaction 
AIDS acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
AV atrioventricular 
BCG Bacille Calmette–Guérin (vaccine) 
BP British Pharmacopoeia 
BSA body surface area 
CNS central nervous system 
CSF cerebrospinal fluid 
DOTS directly observed treatment, short-course 
DMARD disease-modifying agents in rheumatoid disorders 
ECG electrocardiogram 
EEG electroencephalogram 
G6PD glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
GFR glomerular filtration rate 
HIV human immunodeficiency virus 
HRT hormone replacement therapy 
INR international normalized ratio 
MB multibacillary leprosy 
MDI metered dose inhaler 
MDR-TB multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
NSAIM non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicine 
PB paucibacillary leprosy 
PTB pulmonary tuberculosis 
spp. species 
SSRI selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
TB tuberculosis 
USP United States Pharmacopeia 
WHO World Health Organization 

vi WHO Model Formulary 2008 



 

Introduction 

In 1995, the WHO Expert Committee on the Use of Essential Drugs 
recommended that WHO develop a Model Formulary which would 
complement the WHO Model List of Essential Drugs (the “Model List”). It 
was considered that such a WHO Model Formulary would be a useful resource 
for countries wishing to develop their own national formulary. The WHO 
Model Formulary was first published in August 2002.  
In this edition, we have reverted to the structure and sections used in the 
WHO Model List. Although this may not always reflect ideal therapeutic 
categories, it has been done as part of the process of updating the entire WHO 
Medicines Library, which now has one interlinked structure that includes the 
formulary information as well as other information about the listed medicines. 
Countries or organizations which choose to adapt the Model Formulary for 
their own purposes may wish to adjust the structure to suit their needs.  
The WHO Model List and the WHO Model Formulary are available 
electronically on the WHO Essential Medicines Library web site 
(http://www.who.int/emlib/); search facilities provide easy access to relevant 
information.  
An electronic version of the WHO Model Formulary is also available, intended 
as a starting point for developing national or institutional formularies. National 
or institutional committees can use the text of the WHO Model Formulary for 
their own needs either by adapting the text, or by adding or deleting entries to 
align the formulary to their own list of essential medicines. 
This edition of the WHO Model Formulary is fully compatible with the 15th 
WHO Model List of Essential Medicines as recommended by the WHO 
Expert Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines at its 
meeting of March 2007. For a list of the more significant changes made to the 
WHO Model List at this time see Changes to the WHO Model List of 
Essential Medicines (page vii).  
Comments and suggestions for corrections or changes are very welcome and 
should be sent to:  

The Editor (WMF)  
Medicine Access and Rational Use (MAR)  
Department of Essential Medicines and Pharmaceutical Policies (EMP)  
Health Systems and Services (HSS) 
World Health Organization  
20 Avenue Appia  
CH-1211 Geneva 27  
E-mail: modelformulary@who.int 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 vii 



 

Changes to the WHO Model List of Essential 
Medicines  
Changes made to the 14th WHO Model List (2005) to produce the 15th 
WHO Model List (2007) are listed below: 

Other changes 
Section 8.2  Cytotoxic medicines were marked for review at the next 

meeting of the Expert Committee. 
Section 8.4  The note for medicines used in palliative care was 

updated. 
Section 19.3  The Committee revised the note on the selection of 

vaccines and updated the WHO Model List to include all 
vaccines for which there is a SAGE recommendation or a 
WHO position paper. 

Section 21  Ophthalmological preparations were marked for review at 
the next meeting of the Expert Committee. 

Additions 
Section 2.2 Morphine, prolonged-release tablet: 10 mg; 30 mg; 60 mg. 
Section 5 Carbamazepine, chewable tablet: 100 mg; 200 mg; and 

oral liquid: 100 mg/5 ml. 
 Phenobarbital, injection: 200 mg/ml. 
 Phenytoin, chewable tablet: 50 mg and  

oral liquid: 25–30 mg/5 ml. 
 Valproic acid, crushable tablet: 100 mg and oral liquid: 

200 mg/5 ml. 
Section 6.2.1 Cefazolin, powder for injection: 1 g in vial (as sodium 

salt). 
Section 6.2.4 Isoniazid, scored tablet: 50 mg. 

Pyrazinamide, dispersible tablet: 150 mg and  
scored tablet: 150 mg. 

 Rifampicin + isoniazid + ethambutol, fixed-dose 
combination tablet: 150 mg + 75 mg + 275 mg. 

Section 6.4.2.1  Emtricitabine capsules 200 mg and oral liquid 10 mg/ml. 
Section 6.4.2.2 Efavirenz tablet 600 mg. 

viii WHO Model Formulary 2008 



 

Section 6.4.2.1 Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, tablet : 300 mg. 
New unnumbered  
section: Fixed-dose combinations of antiretrovirals: 

Efavirenz + emtricitabine + tenofovir,  
tablet: 600 mg + 200 mg + 300 mg. 
Emtricitabine + tenofovir, tablet: 200 mg + 300 mg. 
Stavudine + lamivudine + nevirapine,  
tablet: 30 mg + 150 mg + 200 mg. 
Zidovudine + lamivudine, tablet : 300 mg + 150 mg. 
Zidovudine + lamivudine + nevirapine,  
tablet: 300 mg + 150 mg + 200 mg. 

Section 6.4.3 Other antivirals (new section): 
Ribavirin, injection for intravenous administration: 
800 mg; 1000 mg in 10-ml phosphate buffer solution and 
oral solid dosage form: 200 mg; 400 mg; 600 mg. 

Section 6.5.2 Paromomycin, solution for intramuscular injection: 
750 mg/2 ml (as sulfate). 

Section 6.5.3 Artesunate, injection: 60 mg. 
Section 11.2 Human normal immunoglobulin, for intravenous 

administration: 5%; 10% protein solution and for 
intramuscular administration: 16% protein solution.  

Section 12.6 Simvastatin, tablet: 5 mg; 10 mg; 20 mg; 40 mg. 
Section 18.3.2 Medroxyprogesterone acetate + estradiol cypionate, 

injection: 25 mg + 5 mg. 
Section 18.3.5 Implantable contraceptives (new section): 

Levonorgestrel-releasing implant, two-rod: each 
containing 75 mg levonorgestrel. 

Section 19.3 Cholera, hepatitis A, Haemophilus influenzae type b, 
Japanese encephalitis, pneumococcal, rotavirus, and 
varicella vaccines. 

Section 21.1 Aciclovir, ointment: 3% W/W. 
Section 24.2.1 Fluoxetine, tablet or capsule: 20 mg. 
Section 25.2 Other medicines acting on the respiratory tract  

(new section): 
Caffeine citrate, injection: 20 mg/ml and oral liquid: 
20 mg/ml. 

Section 27 Retinol, capsule: 50,000 IU; 100,000 IU (as palmitate). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 ix 



 

Amendments to dosage strengths and forms 
Section 12.2 Epinephrine (adrenaline) injection: changed to 

100 micrograms/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 
Section 13.2  Neomycin sulfate + bacitracin, ointment: changed to 

neomycin sulfate, 5 mg + bacitracin zinc 250 IU/g. 
Section 13.4  Aluminium diacetate, solution: changed to 5%. 
Section 19.2 Antivenom sera, changed to antivenom immunoglobulin. 

Deletions 
Section 6.2.4 Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin for the treatment of 

multidrug resistant-TB. 
Section 6.5.3.1 Chloroquine, injection: 40 mg/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 
Section 6.5.5.1 Pentamidine, powder for injection: 300 mg. 
Section 8.2  Chlormethine, powder for injection: 10 mg. 
 Levamisole, tablet: 50 mg. 
Section 14.2 Iopanoic acid, tablet: 500 mg. 
 Propyliodone, oily suspension: 500–600 mg/20 ml 

ampoules. 
Section 21.1 Idoxuridine, ointment: 0.2% and solution: 0.1%. 

Moved from complementary to core list 
Section 6.5.3.1  Artemether, oily injection: 80 mg/ml in 1-ml ampoule. 
 Artesunate, tablet: 50 mg. 
 Doxycycline, tablet or capsule: 100 mg. 
 Mefloquine, tablet: 250 mg. 
 Sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine, tablet: 500 mg + 25 mg. 
Section 6.5.5.1  Eflornithine, injection: 200 mg. 
 Pentamidine; powder for injection: 200 mg. 
 

x WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

 

 

 

General advice to prescribers 

Rational approach to therapeutics 2 

Variation in dose–response 4 

Adherence (compliance) with drug treatment 6 

Adverse effects and interactions 9 

Prescription writing 12 

Sample prescription 14 

 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 1 



General advice to prescribers 

Rational approach to therapeutics 

Drugs should only be prescribed when they are necessary, and in all cases the 
benefit of administering the medicine should be considered in relation to the 
risks involved. Bad prescribing habits lead to ineffective and unsafe treatment, 
exacerbation or prolongation of illness, distress and harm to the patient, and 
higher cost. The guide to good prescribing; Geneva: World Health Organization; 
1994, provides undergraduates with important tools for training in the process 
of rational prescribing.  
The following steps will help to remind prescribers of the rational approach to 
therapeutics:  
1. Define the patient’s problem 

Whenever possible, making the right diagnosis is based on integrating 
many pieces of information: the complaint as described by the patient; a 
detailed history; physical examination; laboratory tests; and X-rays and 
other investigations. This will help in rational prescribing, always bearing 
in mind that diseases are evolutionary processes.  

2. Specify the therapeutic objective 
Doctors must clearly state their therapeutic objectives based on the 
pathophysiology underlying the clinical situation. Very often physicians 
must select more than one therapeutic goal for each patient.  

3. Select the therapeutic strategies 
The selected strategy should be agreed with the patient; this agreement on 
outcome, and how it may be achieved, is termed concordance. 
The selected treatment can be non-pharmacological and/or pharma-
cological; it also needs to take into account the total cost of all therapeutic 
options.  
a. Non-pharmacological treatment 

It is very important to bear in mind that the patient does not always 
need a drug for treatment of their condition. Very often, health 
problems can be resolved by a change in lifestyle or diet, use of 
physiotherapy or exercise, provision of adequate psychological 
support, and other non-pharmacological treatments; these have the 
same importance as a prescription drug, and instructions for such 
treatments must be written, explained, and monitored in the same 
way.  

2 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

b. Pharmacological treatment  

Selecting the correct group of drugs 
Knowledge about the pathophysiology involved in the clinical 
situation of each patient and the pharmacodynamics of the chosen 
group of drugs, are the two fundamental principles for rational 
therapeutics.  
Selecting the drug from the chosen group 
The selection process must consider benefit/risk/cost information. 
This step is based on evidence about maximal clinical benefits of the 
drug for a given indication (efficacy) with the minimum production 
of adverse effects (safety). It must be remembered that each drug has 
adverse effects and it is estimated that up to 10% of hospital 
admissions in industrialized countries are due to adverse effects. Not 
all drug-induced injury can be prevented but much of it is caused by 
inappropriate selection of drugs. In cost comparisons between drugs, 
the cost of the total treatment and not only the unit cost of the drug 
must be considered.  
Verifying the suitability of the chosen pharmaceutical treatment for each patient 
The prescriber must check whether the active substance chosen, its 
dosage form, standard dosage schedule, and standard duration of 
treatment are suitable for each patient. Drug treatment should be 
individualized to the needs of each patient.  
Prescription writing 
As the prescription is the link between the prescriber, the pharmacist 
(or dispenser), and the patient, it is vital to the successful 
management of the presenting medical condition. This item is 
covered in more detail in a following section (see Prescription 
writing).  
Giving information, instructions, and warnings 
This step is important to ensure patient adherence and is covered in 
detail in a following section (see Adherence (compliance) with drug 
treatment).  
Monitoring treatment 
Evaluation of the follow-up and the outcome of treatment allows the 
stopping of it (if the patient’s problem is solved) or its reformulation 
it when necessary. This step gives rise to important information 
about the effects of drugs, contributing to the building up of the 
body of knowledge of pharmacovigilance, which is needed to 
promote the rational use of drugs.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 3 



General advice to prescribers 

 
Variation in dose–response 

Success in drug treatment depends not only on the correct choice of drug but 
on the correct dose regimen. Unfortunately drug treatment frequently fails 
because the dose is too small or produces adverse effects because it is too large. 
This is because most texts, teachers, and other drug information sources 
continue to recommend standard doses.   
The concept of a standard or “average” adult dose for every medicine is firmly 
rooted in the mind of most prescribers. After the initial “dose ranging” studies 
on new drugs, manufacturers recommend a dosage that appears to produce the 
desired response in the majority of subjects. These studies are usually done on 
healthy, young male Caucasian volunteers, rather than on older men and 
women with illnesses and of different ethnic and environmental backgrounds. 
The use of standard doses in the marketing literature suggests that standard 
responses are the rule, but in reality there is considerable variation in drug 
response. There are many reasons for this variation which include adherence 
(see below), drug formulation, body weight and age, composition, variation in 
drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion, variation in 
pharmacodynamics, disease variables, and genetic and environmental 
variables.   

Drug formulation  
Poorly formulated drugs may fail to disintegrate or to dissolve. Enteric-coated 
drugs have been known to pass through the gastrointestinal tract intact. In 
drugs with a narrow therapeutic to toxic ratio, changes in absorption can 
produce sudden changes in drug concentration. For such drugs, quality control 
surveillance should be carried out.   

Body weight and age  
Although the concept of varying the dose with the body weight or age of 
children has a long tradition, adult doses have been assumed to be the same 
irrespective of size or shape. Yet adult weights vary 2- to 3-fold, while a patient 
with a large fat mass can store large excesses of highly lipid soluble drugs 
compared with a lean patient of the same weight.  
Age changes can also be important. Adolescents may oxidize some drugs 
relatively more rapidly than adults, while the elderly may have reduced renal 
function and eliminate some drugs more slowly.   

4 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

Dose calculation in children 
Children's doses may be calculated from adult doses by using age, body weight, 
or body surface area, or by a combination of these factors. The most reliable 
methods are those based on body surface area.  
Body weight may be used to calculate doses expressed in mg/kg. Young 
children may require a higher dose per kilogram than adults because of their 
higher metabolic rates. Other problems need to be considered. For example, 
calculation by body weight in an overweight child may result in much higher 
doses being administered than necessary; in such cases, dose should be 
calculated from an ideal weight, related to height and age. Nomograms are 
available to allow body surface values to be calculated from a child’s height and 
weight.  
Where the dose for children is not readily available, prescribers should seek 
specialist advice before prescribing for a child.   

Physiological and pharmacokinetic variables   
Drug absorption rates may vary widely between individuals and in the same 
individual at different times and in different physiological states. Drugs taken 
after a meal are delivered to the small intestine much more slowly than in the 
fasting state, leading to much lower drug concentrations. In pregnancy gastric 
emptying is also delayed, while some drugs may increase or decrease gastric 
emptying and affect absorption of other drugs.   

Drug distribution   
Drug distribution varies widely: fat-soluble drugs are stored in adipose tissue, 
water-soluble drugs are distributed chiefly in the extracellular space, acidic 
drugs bind strongly to plasma albumin, and basic drugs to muscle cells. Hence 
variation in plasma albumin concentration, fat content or muscle mass may all 
contribute to dose variation. With very highly albumin-bound drugs like 
warfarin, a small change of albumin concentration can produce a big change in 
free drug and a dramatic change in drug effect.   

Drug metabolism and excretion   
Drug metabolism is affected by genetic, environmental, and disease-state 
factors. Drug acetylation shows genetic polymorphism, whereby individuals 
fall clearly into either fast or slow acetylator types. Drug oxidation, however, is 
polygenic, and although a small proportion of the population can be classified 
as very slow oxidizers of some drugs, for most drugs and most subjects there 
is a normal distribution of drug metabolizing capacity.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 5 



General advice to prescribers 

Many drugs are eliminated by the kidneys without being metabolized. Renal 
disease or toxicity of other drugs on the kidney can therefore slow excretion of 
some drugs.   

Pharmacodynamic variables   
There is significant variation in receptor response to some drugs, especially 
central nervous system responses, for example pain and sedation. This can be 
because of genetic factors, tolerance, drug interactions, and drug dependence.   

Disease variables   
Both liver disease and kidney disease can have major effects on drug response, 
chiefly through the effect on metabolism and elimination, respectively 
(increasing toxicity), but also through their effect on plasma albumin 
(increasing free drug and thus toxicity). Heart failure can also affect 
metabolism of drugs with rapid hepatic clearance (for example lidocaine, 
propranolol). Respiratory disease and hypothyroidism can impair drug 
oxidation.   

Environmental variables   
Many drugs and environmental toxins can induce the hepatic microsomal 
enzyme oxidizing system or cytochrome P450 oxygenases, leading to more 
rapid metabolism and elimination, and thus less effective treatment. 
Environmental pollutants, anaesthetic drugs, and other compounds such as 
pesticides can also induce metabolism. Diet and nutritional status also affect 
pharmacokinetics. For example, in infantile malnutrition and in malnourished 
elderly populations drug oxidation rates are decreased, while high protein diets, 
charcoal cooked foods, and certain other foods act as metabolizing enzyme 
inducers. Chronic alcohol use induces oxidation of other drugs, but in the 
presence of high circulating alcohol concentrations, drug metabolism may be 
inhibited. 

Adherence (compliance) with drug treatment 

It is often assumed that once the appropriate drug is chosen, the prescription 
correctly written, and the medication correctly dispensed, that it will be taken 
correctly and treatment will be successful. Unfortunately this is very often not 
the case, and physicians overlook one of the most important reasons for 
treatment failure – poor adherence (compliance) with the treatment plan. 
There are sometimes valid reasons for poor adherence – the drug may be 
poorly tolerated, may cause obvious adverse effects or may be prescribed in a 

6 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

toxic dose. Failure to adhere with such a prescription has been described as 
“intelligent non-compliance”. Bad prescribing or a dispensing error may also 
create a problem, which patients may have neither the insight nor the courage 
to question. Even with good prescribing, failure to adhere to treatment is 
common. Reasons for non-compliance may be related to the patient, the 
disease, the doctor, the prescription, the pharmacist or the health system and 
can often be avoided. 
Patients' perceptions of the risk and severity of adverse drug reactions may 
differ from those of the health-care provider and may affect adherence. 
Low-cost strategies for improving adherence increase effectiveness of health 
interventions and reduce costs. Such strategies must be tailored to the 
individual patient. Health-care providers should be familiar with techniques for 
improving adherence and they should employ systems to assess adherence and 
to determine what influences it. 

Patient reasons 

In general, women tend to be more adherent than men, younger patients and 
the very elderly are less adherent, and people living alone are less adherent than 
those with partners or spouses. Specific education interventions have been 
shown to improve adherence. Patient disadvantages such as illiteracy, poor 
eyesight, or cultural attitudes (for example, preference for traditional or 
alternative medicines and suspicion of modern medicine) may be very 
important in some individuals or societies, as may economic factors. Such 
limitations or attitudes need to be discussed and taken account of. 

Disease reasons 

Conditions with a known worse prognosis (for example, cancer) or painful 
conditions (for example, rheumatoid arthritis) elicit better adherence than 
asymptomatic “perceived as benign” conditions such as hypertension. 

Doctor reasons 

Doctors may cause poor adherence in many ways – by failing to inspire 
confidence in the treatment offered, by giving too little or no explanation, by 
thoughtlessly prescribing too many medicines, by making errors in prescribing, 
or by their overall attitude to the patient. 

The doctor–patient interaction 

There is considerable evidence that the quality of the doctor–patient 
interaction is crucial to concordance. “Satisfaction with the interview” is one 
of the best predictors of good adherence. Patients are often well informed and 
expect a greater say in their health care. If they are in doubt or dissatisfied, they 
may turn to alternative options, including “complementary medicine”. There is 
WHO Model Formulary 2008 7 



General advice to prescribers 

no doubt that the drug “doctor” has a powerful effect on inspiring confidence 
and perhaps contributing directly to the healing process. 

Prescription reasons 

Many aspects of the prescription may lead to non-adherence (non-compliance). 
It may be illegible or inaccurate; it may get lost; it may not be refilled as 
intended or instructed for a chronic disease. Also, the prescription may be too 
complex; the greater the number of different medicines, the poorer the 
adherence. Multiple doses also decrease adherence, especially if more than two 
doses per day are given. Not surprisingly, adverse effects like drowsiness, 
impotence, or nausea reduce adherence and patients may not admit to the 
problem. 

Pharmacist reasons 

The pharmacist’s manner and professionalism, like the doctor’s, may have a 
positive influence on adherence, or a negative one, raising suspicions or 
concerns. This has been reported in relation to generic drugs when substituted 
for brand-name drugs. Pharmacist information and advice can be a valuable 
reinforcement, as long as it agrees with the doctor’s advice. 

The health-care system 

The health-care system may be the biggest hindrance to adherence. Long 
waiting times, uncaring staff, an uncomfortable environment, and unreliable 
drug supplies, are all common problems in many settings, and have a major 
impact on adherence. An important problem is the distance from and the 
accessibility to the clinic. Some studies have confirmed the obvious, that 
patients furthest from the clinic are least likely to adhere to treatment in the 
long term. 

Recommendations 

- Review the prescription to make sure it is correct.  
- Spend time explaining the health problem and the reason for the drug.  
- Establish good rapport with the patient.  
- Explore problems, for example, difficulty with reading the label or getting 
the prescription filled.  

- Encourage patients to bring their medication to the clinic, so that tablet 
counts can be done to monitor compliance.  

- Encourage patients to learn the names of their medicines, and review their 
regimen with them. Write notes for them.  

- Keep treatment regimens simple.  

8 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

- Communicate with other health-care professionals to develop a team 
approach and to collaborate on helping and advising the patient.  

- Involve the partner or another family member.  
- Listen to the patient.  

Adverse effects and interactions 

Adverse drug reactions   
An adverse drug reaction (ADR) may be defined as “any response to a drug 
which is noxious, unintended and occurs at doses normally used for 
prophylaxis, diagnosis or therapy…”. ADRs are therefore unwanted or 
unintended effects of a medicine, including idiosyncratic effects, which occur 
during its proper use. They differ from accidental or deliberate excessive 
dosage or drug maladministration (see section 4 for the treatment of 
poisoning).   
ADRs may be directly linked to the properties of the drug in use, the so-called 
“A” type reactions. An example is hypoglycaemia induced by an antidiabetic 
drug. ADRs may also be unrelated to the known pharmacology of the drug, 
the “B” type reactions which include allergic effects, for example, anaphylaxis 
with penicillins.   
Thalidomide marked the first recognized public health disaster related to the 
introduction of a new drug. It is now recognized that clinical trials, however 
thorough, cannot be guaranteed to detect all adverse effects likely to be caused 
by a drug. Health workers are thus encouraged to record and report to their 
national pharmacovigilance centre any unexpected adverse effects with any 
drug in order to achieve faster recognition of serious related problems.   

Major factors predisposing to adverse effects  
It is well known that different patients often respond differently to a given 
treatment regimen. For example, in patients taking combinations of drugs 
known to interact, only a small number show any clinical evidence of 
interactions. In addition to the pharmaceutical properties of the drug therefore, 
there are characteristics of the patient which predispose to ADRs.   

Extremes of age 

The very old and the very young are more susceptible to ADRs. Drugs which 
commonly cause problems in the elderly include hypnotics, diuretics, non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antihypertensives, psychotropics, and 
digoxin.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 9 



General advice to prescribers 

All children, and particularly neonates, differ from adults in their response to 
drugs. Some drugs are likely to cause problems in neonates (for example 
morphine), but are generally tolerated in children. Other drugs (for example 
valproic acid) are associated with increased risk of ADRs in children of all ages. 
Other drugs associated with problems in children include chloramphenicol 
(grey baby syndrome), antiarrhythmics (worsening of arrhythmias), and 
acetylsalicylic acid (Reye syndrome).   

Intercurrent illness  

If besides the condition being treated, the patient suffers from another disease, 
such as kidney, liver or heart disease, special precautions may be necessary to 
prevent ADRs. The genetic make-up of the individual patient may also affect 
predisposition to ADRs.  

Drug interactions  

Interactions (see also Appendix 1) may occur between drugs which compete 
for the same receptor or which act on the same physiological system. They 
may also occur indirectly when a drug-induced disease or a change in fluid or 
electrolyte balance alters the response to another drug. In addition, interactions 
may occur when one drug alters the absorption, distribution or elimination of 
another drug, such that the amount which reaches the site of action is 
increased or decreased.   
Drug–drug interactions are some of the commonest causes of adverse effects. 
When two drugs are administered to a patient, they may either act 
independently of each other, or interact with each other. Interaction may 
increase or decrease the effects of the drugs concerned and may cause 
unexpected toxicity. As newer and more potent drugs become available, the 
number of serious drug interactions is likely to increase. Remember that 
interactions which modify the effects of a drug may involve non-prescription 
drugs, non-medicinal chemical agents, and social drugs such as alcohol, 
marijuana, tobacco, and traditional remedies, as well as certain types of food 
for example, grapefruit juice. The physiological changes in individual patients, 
caused by such factors as age and gender, also influence the predisposition to 
ADRs resulting from drug interactions.   
The following table lists drugs under the designation of specific cytochrome 
P450 isoforms. A drug appears in a given column if there is published 
evidence that it is metabolized, at least in part, via that isoform. Alterations in 
the rate of the metabolic reaction catalysed by that isoform are likely to have 
effects on the pharmacokinetics of the drug.  
  

10 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

SUBSTRATES 
CYP1A2 CYP2B6 CYP2C19 CYP2C9 CYP2D6 CYP2E1 CYP3A4, 5, 7 
  Cyclophosphamide Amitriptyline Ibuprofen Amitriptyline Alcohol Amlodipine 

Efavirenz Clomipramine Phenytoin Clomipramine Paracetamol Chlorphenamine 
Methadone Cyclophosphamide Sulfamethoxazole Codeine Ciclosporin 

Diazepam Tamoxifen Haloperidol Diazepam 
Phenobarbital Warfarin Tamoxifen Erythromycin 
Phenytoin Timolol Haloperidol 

Indinavir 
Methadone 
Nifedipine 
Quinidine 
Quinine 
Ritonavir 
Saquinavir 
Tamoxifen 
Verapamil 
Vincristine 
  

INHIBITORS 
1A2 2B6 2C19 2C9 2D6 2E1 3A4 
Ciprofloxacin     Isoniazid Chlorphenamine   Erythromycin 

Clomipramine Grapefruit juice 
Haloperidol Indinavir 
Methadone Nelfinavir 
Quinidine Ritonavir 
Ritonavir Verapamil 

  

INDUCERS 
1A2 2B6 2C19 2C9 2D6 2E1 3A4 

  
Tobacco Phenobarbital   Rifampicin   Alcohol Carbamazepine 

Rifampicin Isoniazid Phenobarbital 
Phenytoin 
Rifampicin 
  

  

Incompatibilities between drugs and intravenous fluids  
Drugs should not be added to blood, amino acid solutions, or fat emulsions. 
Certain drugs, when added to intravenous fluids, may be inactivated by pH 
changes, by precipitation or by chemical reaction. Benzylpenicillin and 
ampicillin lose potency after 6–8 hours if added to dextrose solutions, due to 
the acidity of these solutions. Some drugs bind to plastic containers and tubing, 
for example, diazepam and insulin. Aminoglycosides are incompatible with 
penicillins and heparin. Hydrocortisone is incompatible with heparin, 
tetracycline, and chloramphenicol.  

Adverse effects caused by traditional medicines  
Patients who have been, or are taking, traditional herbal remedies may develop 
ADRs. In these types of preparation, it is not always easy to identify the 
responsible plant or plant constituent. Refer to the drug and toxicology 
information service if available or to suitable literature.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 11 



General advice to prescribers 

The effect of food on drug absorption  
Food delays gastric emptying and reduces the rate of absorption of many drugs; 
the total amount of drug absorbed may or may not be reduced. However, 
some drugs are taken with food, either to increase absorption or to decrease 
the irritant effect on the stomach. 

Prescription writing 

A prescription is an instruction from a prescriber to a dispenser. The 
prescriber is not always a doctor but can be a paramedical worker, such as a 
medical assistant, a midwife or a nurse. The dispenser is not always a 
pharmacist, but can be a pharmacy technician, an assistant, or a nurse. Every 
country has its own standards for the minimum information required for a 
prescription, and its own laws and regulations to define which drugs require a 
prescription and who is entitled to write it. Many countries have separate 
regulations for prescriptions for controlled drugs such as opioid analgesics.  
The following guidelines will help to ensure that prescriptions are correctly 
interpreted and leave no doubt about the intention of the prescriber. The 
guidelines are relevant for primary care prescribing; they may, however, be 
adapted for use in hospitals or other specialist units. 

Prescription form 
The most important requirement is that the prescription be clear. It should be 
legible and indicate precisely what should be given. The local language is 
preferred. 
The following details should be shown on the form: 

– The prescriber’s name, address, and telephone number. This will allow 
either the patient or the dispenser to contact the prescriber for any 
clarification or potential problem with the prescription.  

– Date of the prescription. In many countries, the validity of a prescription 
has no time limit, but in some countries pharmacists do not dispense drugs 
on prescriptions older than 3–6 months.  

– Name, form, and strength of the drug. The International Nonproprietary 
Name of the drug should always be used. If there is a specific reason to 
prescribe a special brand, the trade name can be added. Generic 
substitution is allowed in some countries. The pharmaceutical form (for 
example, “tablet”, “oral solution”, “eye ointment”) should also be stated.  

– The strength of the drug should be stated in standard units using 
abbreviations that are consistent with the Système International (SI). 

12 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



General advice to prescribers 

“Microgram” and “nanogram” should not, however, be abbreviated. Also, 
‘units’ should not be abbreviated. Avoid decimals whenever possible. If 
this is unavoidable, a zero should be written in front of the decimal point.  

– Specific areas for filling in details about the patient, including name, 
address, and age.  

Directions 
Directions specifying the route, dose, and frequency should be clear and 
explicit; use of phrases such as “take as directed” or “take as before” should be 
avoided. 
For preparations which are to be taken on an “as required” basis, the 
minimum dose interval should be stated together with, where relevant, the 
maximum daily dose. It is good practice to qualify such prescriptions with the 
purpose of the medication (for example, “every 6 hours as required for pain”, 
“at night as required to sleep”). 
It is good practice to explain the directions to the patient; these directions will 
then be reinforced by the label on the medicinal product and possibly by 
appropriate counselling by the dispenser. It may be worthwhile giving a written 
note for complicated regimens although it must be borne in mind that the 
patient may lose the separate note. 

Quantity to be dispensed 
The quantity of the medicinal product to be supplied should be stated such 
that it is not confused with either the strength of the product or the dosage 
directions. Alternatively, the length of the treatment course may be stated (for 
example “for 5 days”). 
Wherever possible, the quantity should be adjusted to match the pack sizes 
available. 
For liquid preparations, the quantity should be stated in millilitres (abbreviated 
as “ml”) or litres (preferably not abbreviated since the letter “l” could be 
confused with the figure “1”). 

Narcotics and controlled substances 
The prescribing of a medicinal product that is liable to abuse requires special 
attention and may be subject to specific statutory requirements. Practitioners 
may need to be authorized to prescribe controlled substances; in such cases it 
might be necessary to indicate details of the authority on the prescription. 
In particular, the strength, directions, and the quantity of the controlled 
substance to be dispensed should be stated clearly, with all quantities written in 
words as well as in figures to prevent alteration. Other details such as patient 
particulars and date should also be filled in carefully to avoid alteration.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 13 



General advice to prescribers 

Sample prescription 

 
PRESCRIPTION 

 
 Dr B Who 

Geneva 
Switzerland 
Tel: +41 22 791 2111 

 
 Date:  

  
Name of patient: 
  
Address: 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Date of birth: Sex: 

 
Treatment: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For use by the dispensary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

14 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

 

 

 

SECTION 1:  
Anaesthetics 

 

1.1 General anaesthetics and oxygen 16 

1.2 Local anaesthetics 21 

1.3 Preoperative medication and sedation for 
short-term procedures 26 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 15 



1. Anaesthetics 

This section describes drugs used in anaesthesia. The reader is referred to 
WHO model prescribing information, Drugs used in anaesthesia. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 1989, for more detailed information. 

To produce a state of prolonged full surgical anaesthesia reliably and safely, a 
variety of drugs is needed. Special precautions and close monitoring of the 
patient are also required. Anaesthetic drugs may be fatal if used inappropriately 
and should be used by non-specialized personnel only as a last resort. 
Irrespective of whether a general or conduction (regional or local) anaesthetic 
technique is used, it is essential that facilities for intubation and mechanically-
assisted ventilation are available. A full preoperative assessment is required 
including, if necessary, appropriate fluid replacement. 
Anaesthesia may be induced with an intravenous barbiturate, parenteral 
ketamine, or a volatile agent. Maintenance is with inhalational agents often 
supplemented by other drugs given intravenously. Specific drugs may be used 
to produce muscle relaxation. Various drugs may be needed to modify normal 
physiological functions or otherwise to maintain the patient in a satisfactory 
condition during surgery. 

Long-term medication  
The risk of stopping long-term medication before surgery may be greater than 
the risk of continuing it. It is essential that the anaesthetist is told of all drugs 
that the patient is (or has been) taking; for further advice, see section 10.2 (oral 
anticoagulants), section 18.1 (corticosteroids), section 18.3.1 (hormonal 
contraceptives), and section 18.5 (diabetic patients). 

1.1 General anaesthetics and oxygen 

Intravenous agents  
Intravenous anaesthetics may be used alone to produce anaesthesia for short 
surgical procedures but are more commonly used for induction only. They can 
produce apnoea and hypotension and thus facilities for adequate resuscitation 
must be available. They are contraindicated if the anaesthetist is not confident 
of being able to maintain an airway. Before intubation is attempted, a muscle 
relaxant must be given. Individual requirements vary considerably; lesser 
dosage is indicated in the elderly, debilitated, or hypovolaemic patients.  
Intravenous induction using thiopental is rapid and excitement does not 
usually occur. Anaesthesia persists for about 4–7 minutes; large or repeated 
doses severely depress respiration and delay recovery.   

16 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Anaesthesia with ketamine persists for up to 15 minutes after a single 
intravenous injection and is characterized by profound analgesia. It may be 
used as the sole agent for diagnostic and minor surgical interventions. 
Subanaesthetic concentrations of ketamine may be used to provide analgesia 
for painful procedures of short duration such as the dressing of burns, 
radiotherapeutic procedures, marrow sampling and minor orthopaedic 
procedures. Recovery from ketamine anaesthesia is associated with a high 
incidence of hallucinations and other emergence reactions, such as delirium. 
Ketamine is of particular value in children, in whom hallucinations are believed 
to be less significant.  

Volatile inhalational agents  
One of the volatile anaesthetics, ether or halothane (with or without nitrous 
oxide), must be used for induction when intravenous agents are 
contraindicated and particularly when intubation is likely to be difficult. Full 
muscle relaxation is achieved in deep anaesthesia with ether [no longer 
included on the 15th WHO Model List]. Excess bronchial and salivary 
secretion can be avoided by premedication with atropine. Laryngeal spasm may 
occur during induction and intubation. Localized capillary bleeding can be 
troublesome and postoperative nausea and vomiting are frequent; recovery 
time is slow particularly after prolonged administration.  
If intubation is likely to be difficult, halothane is preferred. It does not 
augment salivary or bronchial secretions and the incidence of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting is low. Severe hepatitis, which may be fatal, sometimes 
occurs; it is more likely in patients who are repeatedly anaesthetized with 
halothane within a short period of time.  

Inhalational gases  
Nitrous oxide is used for the maintenance of anaesthesia. It is too weak to be 
used alone, but it allows the dosage of other anaesthetic agents to be reduced. 
It has a strong analgesic action.  
Oxygen should be added routinely during anaesthesia with inhalational agents, 
even when air is used as the carrier gas, to protect against hypoxia.  
Oxygen is also used in the management of anaphylaxis (section 3), myocardial 
infarction (section 12.5), and severe acute asthma (section 25.1).   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 17 



1. Anaesthetics 

 

Identification of cylinders for inhalation gases 
An ISO standard (International Standard 32, Gas Cylinders for Medical Use, 
1977) requires that cylinders containing nitrous oxide should bear the name of 
the contents in legible and permanent characters and, preferably, also the 
chemical symbol, N2O. The neck, from the valve to the shoulder, should be 
coloured blue. Cylinders containing oxygen intended for medical use should 
bear the name of the contents in legible and permanent characters and, 
preferably, also the chemical symbol, O2. The neck, from the valve to the 
shoulder, should be coloured white. Cylinders containing nitrous oxide and 
oxygen mixtures should be similarly labelled, and the neck coloured white and 
blue.   

 

Halothane 
Inhalation.  

Volatile liquid. 

Halothane is a representative volatile anaesthetic. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: induction and maintenance of anaesthesia. 
Contraindications: history of unexplained jaundice or pyrexia following 
previous exposure to halothane; family history of malignant hyperthermia; 
raised cerebrospinal fluid pressure; porphyria. 

Precautions: anaesthetic history should be carefully taken to determine 
previous exposure and previous reactions to halothane (at least 3 months 
should be allowed to elapse between each re-exposure); avoid for dental 
procedures in patients under 18 years unless treated in hospital (high risk of 
arrhythmias); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Induction, using a specifically calibrated vaporizer, gradually increase inspired gas 
concentration to 2–4% (ADULT) or 1.5–2% (CHILD), in oxygen or nitrous 
oxide–oxygen; maintenance, ADULT and CHILD, 0.5–2%. 

Adverse effects: arrhythmias; bradycardia; respiratory depression; hepatic 
damage. 

 

 

18 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Ketamine 
Injection: 50 mg (as hydrochloride)/ml in 10-ml vial. 

Uses: induction and maintenance of anaesthesia; analgesia for painful 
procedures of short duration.  

Contraindications: thyrotoxicosis; hypertension (including pre-eclampsia); 
history of cerebrovascular accident, cerebral trauma, intracerebral mass or 
haemorrhage, or other cause of raised intracranial pressure; eye injury and 
increased intraocular pressure; psychiatric disorders, particularly 
hallucinations; porphyria.  

Precautions: supplementary analgesia often required in surgical procedures 
involving visceral pain pathways (morphine may be used but addition of 
nitrous oxide will often suffice); administer an antisialogogue to prevent 
excessive salivation leading to respiratory difficulties; during recovery, 
patient must remain undisturbed but under observation; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2); interactions: Appendix 1.  

SKILLED TASKS. Warn patient not to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving for 24 hours and also to avoid alcohol for 24 hours.  
Dose:  
Induction, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 6.5–13 mg/kg (10 mg/kg 
usually produces 12–25 minutes of anaesthesia); maintenance, 50–100% of 
induction dose as required. 

Induction, by intravenous injection over at least 1 minute, ADULT and CHILD,  
1–4.5 mg/kg (2 mg/kg usually produces 5–10 minutes of anaesthesia); 
maintenance, 50–100% of induction dose as required. 

Induction, by intravenous infusion of a solution containing 1 mg/ml, ADULT and 
CHILD, total induction dose 0.5–2 mg/kg; maintenance (using microdrip 
infusion), 10–45 micrograms/kg/minute, rate adjusted according to 
response. 

Analgesia, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, initially 4 mg/kg.  
NOTE. For diagnostic procedures and other procedures not involving intense pain.  

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions.  

Adverse effects: hallucinations and other emergence reactions during recovery 
possibly accompanied by irrational behaviour (effects rarely persist for more 
than a few hours but can recur at any time within 24 hours); transient 
elevation of pulse rate and blood pressure common; arrhythmias have 
occurred; hypotension and bradycardia occasionally reported. 

 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 19 



1. Anaesthetics 

Nitrous oxide 
Inhalation. 

Inhalation gas. 

Uses: maintenance of anaesthesia in combination with other anaesthetic agents 
(halothane, ether, or ketamine) and muscle relaxants; analgesia for obstetric 
practice, for emergency management of injuries, during postoperative 
physiotherapy and for refractory pain in terminal illness. 

Contraindications: demonstrable collection of air in pleural, pericardial or 
peritoneal space; intestinal obstruction; occlusion of middle ear; arterial air 
embolism; decompression sickness; chronic obstructive airway disease, 
emphysema.  

Precautions: minimize exposure of staff; pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: 
Appendix 1.  

Dose:  
Anaesthesia, ADULT and CHILD, nitrous oxide mixed with 25–30% oxygen.  
Analgesia, 50% nitrous oxide mixed with 50% oxygen.  
Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting; after prolonged administration 
megaloblastic anaemia and depressed white cell formation; peripheral 
neuropathy. 

Oxygen 
Inhalation (medicinal gas). 

Uses: to maintain an adequate oxygen tension in inhalational anaesthesia.   
FIRE HAZARD. Avoid use of cautery when oxygen is used with ether; reducing valves 
on oxygen cylinders must not be greased (risk of explosion).    

Precautions: interactions: Appendix 1.    
Dose:  

Concentration of oxygen in inspired anaesthetic gases should never be less 
than 21%.   

Adverse effects: concentrations greater than 80% have a toxic effect on the 
lungs leading to pulmonary congestion, exudation and atelectasis.   

 
 
 
 

 

20 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Thiopental 
Powder for injection: 0.5 g; 1.0 g (sodium salt) in ampoule. 

Thiopental is a representative intravenous anaesthetic. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives.   

Uses: induction of anaesthesia prior to administration of inhalational 
anaesthetic; anaesthesia of short duration.   

Contraindications: inability to maintain airway; hypersensitivity to barbiturates; 
cardiovascular disease; dyspnoea or obstructive respiratory disease; 
myotonic dystrophy; porphyria.   

Precautions: reconstituted solution is highly alkaline (extravasation can result 
in extensive tissue necrosis and sloughing); cardiovascular disease; intra-
arterial injection causes intense pain and may result in arteriospasm; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1.   

SKILLED TASKS. Warn patient not to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving for 24 hours and also to avoid alcohol for 24 hours. 
Dose:  
Induction, by intravenous injection usually as a 2.5% (25 mg/ml) solution over  
10–15 seconds, ADULT, 100–150 mg (reduced in the elderly or debilitated 
patients), followed by a further 100–150 mg if necessary according to 
response after 30–60 seconds; or up to 4 mg/kg (maximum 500 mg); CHILD, 
2–7 mg/kg repeated if necessary according to response after 60 seconds.   

RECONSTITUTION. Solutions containing 25 mg/ml should be freshly prepared by 
mixing 20 ml of water for injections with the contents of the 0.5-g ampoule or 40 ml of 
water for injections with that of the 1-g ampoule. Any solution made up over 24 hours 
previously or in which cloudiness, precipitation, or crystallization is evident should be 
discarded. 

Adverse effects: rapid injection may result in severe hypotension and hiccup; 
arrhythmias and myocardial depression; cough, laryngeal spasm and 
sneezing, allergic reactions including rash, injection-site reactions. 

1.2 Local anaesthetics 

Drugs used for conduction anaesthesia (also termed local or regional 
anaesthesia) act by causing a reversible block to conduction along nerve fibres. 
Local anaesthetics are used very widely in dental practice, for brief and 
superficial interventions, for obstetric procedures, and for specialized 
techniques of regional anaesthesia calling for highly developed skills. Where 
patient cooperation is required the patient must be psychologically prepared to 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 21 



1. Anaesthetics 

accept the proposed procedure. Facilities and equipment for resuscitation 
should be readily available at all times. Local anaesthetic injections should be 
given slowly in order to detect inadvertent intravascular injection. 

Local infiltration  

Many simple surgical procedures that neither involve the body cavities nor 
require muscle relaxation can be performed under local infiltration anaesthesia. 
Lower-segment caesarean section can also be performed under local 
infiltration anaesthesia. The local anaesthetic drug of choice is lidocaine 0.5% 
with or without epinephrine. No more than 4 mg/kg of plain lidocaine or 
7 mg/kg of lidocaine with epinephrine should be administered on any one 
occasion. The addition of epinephrine (adrenaline) diminishes local blood flow, 
slows the rate of absorption of the local anaesthetic, and prolongs its effect. 
Care is necessary when using epinephrine for this purpose since, in excess, it 
may produce ischaemic necrosis. It should not be added to injections used in 
digits or appendages. 

Surface anaesthesia  

Topical preparations of lidocaine are available and topical eye drop solutions 
of tetracaine (section 21.3) are used for local anaesthesia of the cornea and 
conjunctiva. 

Regional block  

A regional nerve block can provide safe and effective anaesthesia but its 
execution requires considerable training and practice. Nevertheless, where the 
necessary specialist skills are available, techniques such as axillary or ankle 
blocks can be invaluable. Either lidocaine 1% or bupivacaine 0.5% is suitable. 
Bupivacaine has the advantage of a longer duration of action. 

Spinal anaesthesia  

This is one of the most useful of all anaesthetic techniques and can be used 
widely for surgery of the abdomen and the lower limbs. It is a major procedure 
requiring considerable training and practice. Either lidocaine 5% in glucose or 
bupivacaine 0.5% in glucose can be used but the latter is often chosen because 
of its longer duration of action. 

22 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Bupivacaine 
Injection: 0.25%; 0.5% (hydrochloride) in vial. 
Injection for spinal anaesthesia: 0.5% (hydrochloride) in 4-ml ampoule to be 
mixed with 7.5% glucose solution. 

Bupivacaine is a representative local anaesthetic. Various drugs can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: infiltration anaesthesia; peripheral and sympathetic nerve block; spinal 
anaesthesia; postoperative pain relief. 

Contraindications: adjacent skin infection or inflamed skin; concomitant 
anticoagulant therapy; severe anaemia or heart disease; spinal or epidural 
anaesthesia in dehydrated or hypovolaemic patients. 

Precautions: respiratory impairment; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
epilepsy; porphyria; myasthenia gravis; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:   
Local infiltration, using 0.25% solution, ADULT, up to 150 mg (up to 60 ml). 
Peripheral nerve block, using 0.25% solution, ADULT, up to 150 mg (up to 
60 ml); using 0.5% solution, ADULT, up to 150 mg (up to 30 ml). 

Lumbar epidural block in surgery, using 0.5% solution, ADULT, 50–100 mg 
(10–20 ml). 

Lumbar epidural block in labour, using 0.25–0.5% solution, ADULT (female), 
up to 60 mg (up to 12 ml). 

Caudal block in surgery, using 0.25–0.5% solution, ADULT, up to 150 mg (up 
to 30 ml). 

Caudal block in labour, using 0.25–0.5% solution, ADULT (female), up to 
100 mg (maximum 20 ml). 

NOTE. Use lower doses for debilitated or elderly patients or in epilepsy or acute illness. 

Do not use solutions containing preservatives for spinal, epidural, caudal, or 
intravenous regional anaesthesia. 

Adverse effects: with excessive dosage or following intravascular injection, 
light-headedness, dizziness, blurred vision, restlessness, tremors, and, 
occasionally, convulsions rapidly followed by drowsiness, unconsciousness, 
and respiratory failure; cardiovascular toxicity includes hypotension, heart 
block and cardiac arrest; hypersensitivity and allergic reactions also occur; 
epidural anaesthesia occasionally complicated by urinary retention, faecal 
incontinence, headache, backache, or loss of perineal sensation; transient 
paraesthesia and paraplegia very rare. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 23 



1. Anaesthetics 

Ephedrine 
Injection: 30 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 1-ml ampoule. 

Ephedrine hydrochloride is a complementary medicine. 

Uses: prevention of hypotension during delivery under spinal or epidural 
anaesthesia. 

Precautions: hyperthyroidism; diabetes mellitus; ischaemic heart disease, 
hypertension; angle-closure glaucoma; renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
To prevent hypotension during delivery under spinal anaesthesia, by slow 
intravenous injection of solution containing 3 mg/ml, ADULT, 3–6 mg 
(maximum single dose, 9 mg), repeated if necessary every 3–4 minutes 
(maximum cumulative dose, 30 mg). 

Adverse effects: anorexia, hypersalivation, nausea, vomiting; tachycardia (also 
in fetus), arrhythmias, anginal pain, vasoconstriction with hypertension, 
vasodilation with hypotension; dyspnoea; headache, dizziness, anxiety, 
restlessness, confusion, tremor; difficulty in micturition; sweating, flushing; 
changes in blood glucose concentration. 

Lidocaine 
Injection: 1%; 2% (hydrochloride) in vial.  
Injection for spinal anaesthesia: 5% (hydrochloride) in 2-ml ampoule to be 
mixed with 7.5% glucose solution.  
Topical forms: 2–4% (hydrochloride). 

Lidocaine is a representative local anaesthetic. Various drugs can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: surface anaesthesia of mucous membranes; infiltration anaesthesia; 
peripheral and sympathetic nerve block; dental anaesthesia; spinal 
anaesthesia; intravenous regional anaesthesia; arrhythmias (section 12.2). 

Contraindications: adjacent skin infection, inflamed skin; concomitant 
anticoagulant therapy; severe anaemia or heart disease; spinal or epidural 
anaesthesia in dehydrated or hypovolaemic patients. 

Precautions: bradycardia, impaired cardiac conduction; severe shock; 
respiratory impairment; renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); epilepsy; porphyria; myasthenia gravis; avoid (or use with 
great care) solutions containing epinephrine (adrenaline) for ring block of 
digits or appendages (risk of ischaemic necrosis); pregnancy (Appendix 2) 
and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

24 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Dose:  
Plain solutions 
Local infiltration and peripheral nerve block, using 0.5% solution, ADULT, up 
to 250 mg (up to 50 ml). 

Local infiltration and peripheral nerve block, using 1% solution, ADULT, up to 
250 mg (up to 25 ml). 

Surface anaesthesia of pharynx, larynx, trachea, using 4% solution, ADULT,  
40–200 mg (1–5 ml). 

Surface anaesthesia of urethra, using 4% solution, ADULT, 400 mg (10 ml). 
Spinal anaesthesia, using 5% solution (with glucose 7.5%), ADULT, 50–75 mg 
(1–1.5 ml). 

Solutions containing epinephrine 
Local infiltration and peripheral nerve block, using 0.5% solution with 
epinephrine, ADULT, up to 400 mg (up to 80 ml). 

Local infiltration and peripheral nerve block, using 1% solution with 
epinephrine, ADULT, up to 400 mg (up to 40 ml). 

Dental anaesthesia, using 2% solution with epinephrine, ADULT, 20–100 mg  
(1–5 ml). 

NOTE. Maximum safe doses of lidocaine for ADULT and CHILD are: 0.5% or 1% 
lidocaine, 4 mg/kg; 0.5% or 1% lidocaine + epinephrine 5 micrograms/ml  
(1 in 200 000), 7 mg/kg. 

Use lower doses for debilitated or elderly patients or in epilepsy or acute illness. 

Do not use solutions containing preservatives for spinal, epidural, caudal, or 
intravenous regional anaesthesia. 

Adverse effects: with excessive dosage or following intravascular injection, 
light-headedness, dizziness, blurred vision, restlessness, tremors and, 
occasionally, convulsions rapidly followed by drowsiness, unconsciousness, 
and respiratory failure; cardiovascular toxicity includes hypotension, heart 
block, and cardiac arrest; hypersensitivity and allergic reactions also occur; 
epidural anaesthesia occasionally complicated by urinary retention, faecal 
incontinence, headache, backache, or loss of perineal sensation; transient 
paraesthesia and paraplegia very rare. 

 
 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 25 



1. Anaesthetics 

Lidocaine + epinephrine (adrenaline) 
Dental cartridge: 2% (hydrochloride) + epinephrine 1:80 000.  
Injection: 1%; 2% (hydrochloride) + epinephrine 1:200 000 in vial.  

Lidocaine is a representative local anaesthetic. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: surface anaesthesia of mucous membranes; infiltration anaesthesia; 
peripheral and sympathetic nerve block; dental anaesthesia; spinal 
anaesthesia; intravenous regional anaesthesia; arrhythmias (section 12.2). 

1.3 Preoperative medication and sedation for 
short-term procedures 

Pre-anaesthetic medication is often advisable prior to both conduction and 
general anaesthetic procedures. 
Sedatives improve the course of subsequent anaesthesia in apprehensive 
patients. Diazepam and promethazine are effective. Diazepam can be 
administered by mouth, by rectum, or by intravenous injection. Promethazine, 
which has antihistaminic and antiemetic properties as well as a sedative effect, 
is of particular value in children. 
A potent analgesic such as morphine (section also 2.2) should be administered 
preoperatively to patients in severe pain or for analgesia during and after 
surgery. 
Anticholinergic (or more correctly, antimuscarinic) drugs such as atropine are 
also used before general anaesthesia. They inhibit excessive bronchial and 
salivary secretions induced, in particular, by ether and ketamine. Intramuscular 
administration is most effective, but oral administration is more convenient in 
children. Lower doses should be used in cardiovascular disease or 
hyperthyroidism. 

Atropine 
Injection: 1 mg (sulfate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: to inhibit salivary secretions; to inhibit arrhythmias resulting from 
excessive vagal stimulation; to block the parasympathomimetic effects of 
anticholinesterases such as neostigmine; organophosphate poisoning 
(section 4.2); mydriasis and cycloplegia (section 21.5). 

Contraindications: angle-closure glaucoma; myasthenia gravis; paralytic ileus, 
pyloric stenosis; prostatic enlargement.   

26 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Precautions: Down syndrome; children; the elderly; ulcerative colitis, diarrhoea; 
hyperthyroidism; heart failure, or hypertension; pyrexia; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

DURATION OF ACTION. Since atropine has a shorter duration of action than 
neostigmine, late unopposed bradycardia may result; close monitoring of the patient is 
necessary.   
Dose:  
Premedication, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 300–600 micrograms immediately 
before induction of anaesthesia, CHILD, 20 micrograms/kg (maximum 
600 micrograms); by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, ADULT,  
300–600 micrograms 30–60 minutes before induction; CHILD, 
20 micrograms/kg (maximum, 600 micrograms). 

Intraoperative bradycardia, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 300–600 micrograms 
(larger doses in emergencies); CHILD 1–12 years, 10–20 micrograms/kg. 

Control of muscarinic side-effects of neostigmine in reversal of competitive 
neuromuscular block, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 0.6–1.2 mg; CHILD 
under 12 years, (but rarely used) 20 micrograms/kg (maximum, 
600 micrograms) with neostigmine 50 micrograms/kg.   

Adverse effects: dry mouth; blurred vision, photophobia; flushing and dryness 
of skin, rash; difficulty in micturition; less commonly arrhythmias, 
tachycardia and palpitations; confusion (particularly in the elderly); heat 
prostration and convulsions, especially in febrile children. 

Diazepam 
Injection: 5 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 5 mg. 

Drug subject to international control under the Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances (1971). 

Diazepam is a representative benzodiazepine. Various drugs can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: premedication before major or minor surgery; sedation with amnesia for 
endoscopic procedures and surgery under local anaesthesia; in combination 
with pethidine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], when 
anaesthetic not available, for emergency reduction of fractures; epilepsy 
(section 5); anxiety disorders (section 24.3). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 27 



1. Anaesthetics 

Contraindications: central nervous system depression or coma; shock; 
respiratory depression; acute pulmonary insufficiency; sleep apnoea; acute 
alcohol intoxication; severe hepatic impairment; marked neuromuscular 
respiratory weakness including unstable myasthenia gravis. 

Precautions: respiratory disease; muscle weakness and myasthenia gravis; 
history of alcohol or drug abuse; marked personality disorder; elderly or 
debilitated patients (adverse effects more common in these groups); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5) or renal failure (Appendix 4); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); close observation required 
until full recovery after sedation; porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1.  

SKILLED TASKS. Warn patient not to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving, for 24 hours. 
Dose:  
Premedication, by mouth 2 hours before surgery, ADULT and CHILD over  
12 years, 5–10 mg. 

Sedation, by slow intravenous injection immediately before procedure, ADULT and 
CHILD over 12 years, 200 micrograms/kg. 

ADMINISTRATION. Absorption following intramuscular injection is slow and erratic; 
this route should only be used if neither oral nor intravenous administration are 
possible. Slow intravenous injection into large vein reduces risk of thrombophlebitis. 
Resuscitation equipment must be available. 

Adverse effects: central nervous system effects common and include 
drowsiness, sedation, confusion, amnesia, vertigo, and ataxia; hypotension, 
bradycardia, or cardiac arrest, particularly in elderly or severely ill patients; 
also paradoxical reactions, including irritability, excitability, hallucinations, 
and sleep disturbances; pain and thromboembolism on intravenous 
injection. 

Morphine 
Injection: 10 mg (sulfate or hydrochloride) in 1-ml ampoule. 

See section 2.2. 

Promethazine 
Oral liquid: 5 mg (hydrochloride)/5 ml. 

Uses: premedication prior to surgery; antiemetic (section 17.2). 
Contraindications: child under 1 year; impaired consciousness due to cerebral 
depressants or of other origin; porphyria. 

28 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



1. Anaesthetics 

Precautions: prostatic hypertrophy, urinary retention; glaucoma; epilepsy; 
hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. Warn patient not to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving, for 24 hours. 
Dose:  
Premedication, by mouth 1 hour before surgery, CHILD over 1 year,  
0.5–1 mg/kg. 

Adverse effects: drowsiness (rarely paradoxical stimulation in children); 
headache; anticholinergic effects such as dry mouth, blurred vision, and 
urinary retention. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 29 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

 

 

 

SECTION 2:  
Analgesics, antipyretics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
medicines (NSAIMS), medicines used to treat gout and 
disease-modifying agents in rheumatoid disorders 
(DMARDs) 

 

2.1 Non-opioids and non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory medicines (NSAIMs) 31 

2.2 Opioid analgesics 35 

2.3 Medicines used to treat gout 39 

2.4 Disease-modifying agents used in  
rheumatoid disorders (DMARDs) 40 

30 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Pain may be modified by psychological factors and attention to these is 
essential in pain management. Drug treatment aims to modify the peripheral 
and central mechanisms involved in the development of pain. Neuropathic 
pain may respond only partially to conventional analgesics; treatment can be 
difficult and includes the use of carbamazepine (section 5) for trigeminal 
neuralgia and amitriptyline (section 24.2.1) for diabetic neuropathy and 
postherpetic neuralgia. 
Non-opioid analgesics (section 2.1) are particularly suitable for musculoskeletal 
pain whereas the opioid analgesics (section 2.2) are more suitable for moderate 
to severe visceral pain. Non-opioid analgesics which also have anti-
inflammatory actions include salicylates and other non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory medicines (NSAIMs); they can reduce both pain and 
inflammation of chronic inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, 
but they do not alter or modify the disease process itself. For the management 
of rheumatoid arthritis, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) 
may favourably influence the disease process (section 2.4). The pain and 
inflammation of an acute attack of gout is treated with a NSAIM (section 2.3) 
or colchicine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List]; a xanthine oxidase 
inhibitor (section 2.3) is used for long-term control of gout. 

2.1 Non-opioids and non-steroidal  
anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIMs) 

Non-opioid analgesics with anti-inflammatory activity include the salicylates 
(such as acetylsalicylic acid) and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(such as ibuprofen). Non-opioid analgesics with little or no anti-inflammatory 
activity include paracetamol. 

Acetylsalicylic acid 
The principal effects of acetylsalicylic acid are anti-inflammatory, analgesic, 
antipyretic, and antiplatelet. Oral doses are absorbed rapidly from the 
gastrointestinal tract; rectal absorption is less reliable but suppositories are 
useful in patients unable to take oral dosage forms. Acetylsalicylic acid is used 
for the management of mild to moderate pain such as headache, acute 
migraine attacks (section 7.1), transient musculoskeletal pain, and 
dysmenorrhoea, and for reducing fever. Although it may be used in higher 
doses in the management of pain and inflammation of rheumatoid arthritis, 
other NSAIMs are preferred because they are likely to be better tolerated. 
Acetylsalicylic acid is also used for its antiplatelet properties (section 12.5). 
Adverse effects with analgesic doses are generally mild but include a high 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 31 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

incidence of gastrointestinal irritation with slight blood loss, bronchospasm 
and skin reactions in hypersensitive patients, and increased bleeding time. 
Anti-inflammatory doses are associated with a much higher incidence of 
adverse reactions, and they also cause mild chronic salicylism which is 
characterized by tinnitus and deafness. Acetylsalicylic acid should be avoided in 
children under 16 years, unless specifically indicated (for example, in juvenile 
arthritis), because of an association with Reye syndrome (encephalopathy and 
liver damage); it should particularly be avoided during fever or viral infection 
in children and adolescents.  

Paracetamol 
Paracetamol is similar in analgesic and antipyretic efficacy to acetylsalicylic 
acid. It is used for mild to moderate pain including headache and acute 
migraine attacks (section 7.1), and for reducing fever, including post-
immunization pyrexia. Paracetamol is particularly useful in patients in whom 
salicylates or other NSAIMs are contraindicated, such as asthmatics and those 
with a history of peptic ulcer, or for children under the age of 16 years in 
whom salicylates should be avoided because of the risk of Reye syndrome. It is 
generally preferred to acetylsalicylic acid, particularly in the elderly, because it is 
less irritant to the stomach. Unlike acetylsalicylic acid and other NSAIMs, 
paracetamol has little anti-inflammatory activity which limits its usefulness for 
long-term treatment of pain associated with inflammation; however it is useful 
in the management of osteoarthritis, a condition with only a small 
inflammatory component. In normal doses adverse effects are rare, but 
overdosage with a single dose of 10–15 g is particularly dangerous because it 
may cause hepatocellular necrosis and, less frequently, renal tubular necrosis.  

NSAIMs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines) 
NSAIMs, including ibuprofen, have analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and 
antipyretic properties. In single doses, NSAIMs have analgesic activity 
comparable to that of paracetamol. In regular full dosage, they have a lasting 
analgesic and anti-inflammatory effect, which makes them useful for the 
management of continuous or regular pain due to inflammation. Differences 
in anti-inflammatory activity between different NSAIMs are small but there is 
considerable variation in individual patient response and in the incidence and 
type of adverse effects. Ibuprofen has fewer adverse effects than other 
NSAIMs but its anti-inflammatory properties are weaker. Diclofenac and 
naproxen (neither of which is included on the 15th WHO Model List) 
combine moderately potent anti-inflammatory activity with a relatively low 
incidence of adverse effects (but incidence is higher than that for ibuprofen).  
Ibuprofen is used in the treatment of mild to moderate pain and in the 
management of pain and inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile 

32 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

arthritis. It may also be of value in the less well-defined conditions of back 
pain and soft-tissue disorders. Ibuprofen is also used to reduce pain in children. 
With all NSAIMs caution should be exercised in the treatment of the elderly, 
in allergic disorders, and during pregnancy and breastfeeding. In patients with 
renal, cardiac or hepatic impairment, the dose should be kept as low as 
possible and renal function should be monitored. NSAIMs should not be 
given to patients with active peptic ulceration and should preferably not be 
used in those with a history of the disease. The commonest adverse effects are 
generally gastrointestinal including nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and dyspepsia; 
hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis, bronchospasm, and rash have 
been reported, as has fluid retention. 

Acetylsalicylic acid 
Suppository: 50–150 mg. 
Tablet: 100–500 mg. 

Uses: mild to moderate pain including dysmenorrhoea, and headache; pain and 
inflammation in rheumatic disease and other musculoskeletal disorders, 
including juvenile arthritis; pyrexia; acute migraine attack (section 7.1); 
antiplatelet (section 12.5). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity (including asthma, angioedema, urticaria, or 
rhinitis) to acetylsalicylic acid or any other NSAIM; children and 
adolescents under 16 years (to reduce risk of Reye syndrome, see also notes 
above); previous or active peptic ulceration; haemophilia and other bleeding 
disorders; not for treatment of gout. 

Precautions: asthma, allergic disease; renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); elderly; G6PD-deficiency; dehydration; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Mild to moderate pain, pyrexia, by mouth with or after food, ADULT, 300–
900 mg every 4–6 hours if necessary; maximum, 4 g daily; CHILD under 
16 years, not recommended. 

Mild to moderate pain, pyrexia, by rectum, ADULT, 600–900 mg inserted every 
4 hours if necessary; maximum, 3.6 g daily; CHILD under 16 years, not 
recommended. 

Inflammatory arthritis, by mouth with or after food, ADULT, 4–8 g daily in 
divided doses in acute conditions; up to 5.4 g daily may be sufficient in 
chronic conditions. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 33 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Juvenile arthritis, by mouth with or after food, CHILD, up to 130 mg/kg daily in 
5–6 divided doses in acute conditions; 80–100 mg/kg daily in divided doses 
for maintenance. 

Adverse effects: generally mild and infrequent for lower doses, but common 
with anti-inflammatory doses; gastrointestinal discomfort or nausea, 
ulceration with occult bleeding (occasionally major haemorrhage); also other 
haemorrhage including subconjunctival; hearing disturbances such as 
tinnitus (rarely deafness), vertigo, confusion, hypersensitivity reactions 
including angioedema, bronchospasm, and rash; increased bleeding time; 
rarely oedema, myocarditis and blood disorders (particularly 
thrombocytopenia). 

Ibuprofen 
Tablet: 200 mg; 400 mg. 

Uses: pain and inflammation in rheumatic disease and other musculoskeletal 
disorders including juvenile arthritis; mild to moderate pain including 
dysmenorrhoea and headache; pain in children; acute migraine attack 
(section 7.1). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity (including asthma, angioedema, urticaria, or 
rhinitis) to acetylsalicylic acid or any other NSAIM; active peptic ulceration. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
preferably avoid if history of peptic ulceration; cardiac disease; elderly; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); coagulation 
defects; allergic disorders; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Mild to moderate pain, pyrexia, inflammatory musculoskeletal disorders, by 
mouth with or after food, ADULT, 1.2–1.8 g daily in 3–4 divided doses, 
increased if necessary to maximum 2.4 g daily (3.2 g daily in inflammatory 
disease); maintenance dose of 0.6–1.2 g daily may be sufficient. 

Juvenile arthritis, by mouth with or after food, CHILD, over 7 kg, 30–40 mg/kg 
daily in 3–4 divided doses. 

Pain in CHILD (not recommended for children under 7 kg), by mouth with or 
after food, 20–40 mg/kg daily in divided doses; or CHILD 1–2 years, 50 mg 
3–4 times daily; CHILD 3–7 years, 100 mg 3–4 times daily; CHILD 8–12 years, 
200 mg 3–4 times daily. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances including nausea, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia, ulceration, and haemorrhage; hypersensitivity reactions including 
rash, angioedema and bronchospasm; headache, dizziness, nervousness, 
depression, drowsiness, insomnia, vertigo, tinnitus, photosensitivity, 

34 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

haematuria; fluid retention (rarely precipitating congestive heart failure in 
the elderly), raised blood pressure, renal failure; rarely hepatic damage, 
alveolitis, pulmonary eosinophilia, pancreatitis, visual disturbances, 
erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome), toxic dermal necrolysis 
(Lyell syndrome), colitis and aseptic meningitis. 

Paracetamol 
Oral liquid: 125 mg/5 ml. 
Suppository: 100 mg.  
Tablet: 100–500 mg. 

Uses: mild to moderate pain including dysmenorrhoea and headache; pain 
relief in osteoarthritis and soft tissue lesions; pyrexia including post-
immunization pyrexia; acute migraine attack (section 7.1).   

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
alcohol dependence; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); overdosage: section 4.2; 
interactions: Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Post-immunization pyrexia, by mouth, INFANT 2–3 months, 60 mg followed by 
a second dose, if necessary, 4–6 hours later; warn parents to seek medical 
advice if pyrexia persists after the second dose. 

Mild to moderate pain, pyrexia, by mouth, ADULT, 0.5–1 g every 4–6 hours, 
maximum 4 g daily; CHILD under 3 months, see note below; CHILD 
3 months–1 year, 60–125 mg; CHILD 1–5 years, 120–250 mg; CHILD  
6–12 years, 250–500 mg (in children doses may be repeated every 4–6 hours 
if necessary; maximum, 4 doses in 24 hours). 

Mild to moderate pain, pyrexia, by rectum, ADULT, 0.5–1g; CHILD 1–5 years, 
125–250 mg; CHILD 6–12 years, 250–500 mg (doses may be inserted every 
4–6 hours if necessary; maximum, 4 doses in 24 hours). 

NOTE. Infants under 3 months should not be given paracetamol unless advised by a 
doctor; a dose of 10 mg/kg (5 mg/kg if jaundiced) is suitable. 

Adverse effects: rare but rash and blood disorders reported; important: liver 
damage (and less frequently renal damage) following overdosage. 

2.2 Opioid analgesics 

Morphine is effective in relieving moderate to severe pain, particularly of 
visceral origin; there is a large variation in patient response. Weaker opioids 
such as codeine are suitable for mild to moderate pain.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 35 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Codeine is an opioid analgesic much less potent than morphine and much less 
liable, in normal doses, to produce adverse effects including dependency. It is 
effective for mild to moderate pain but is too constipating for long-term use.  
Morphine remains the most valuable analgesic for severe pain. In addition to 
pain relief it confers a state of euphoria and mental detachment; repeated 
administration may cause dependence and tolerance, but this should not be a 
deterrent in the control of pain in terminal illness (see also section 8.4). 
Regular use may also be appropriate for certain cases of non-malignant pain, 
but specialist supervision is required. In usual doses common adverse effects 
include nausea, vomiting, constipation, and drowsiness; larger doses produce 
respiratory depression and hypotension.  
Morphine is given by mouth as an oral solution, immediate-release tablet, or 
sustained-release tablet for chronic pain treatment. Pain should be controlled 
using immediate-release preparations first. The total morphine requirement 
over 24 hours can then be established and the daily dose may be given as a 
sustained-release preparation (designed for twice daily administration) every 
12 hours.  
Additional doses of morphine can be given for breakthrough pain every 
4 hours if necessary, using immediate-release morphine tablets or oral solution; 
the dose should be about one sixth of the total daily dose of oral morphine. 
The regular dose should then be reviewed and adjusted according to the need 
for additional doses; increments should be made to the dose, rather than to the 
frequency of administration. 

Opioid analgesic overdosage 
Opioids cause coma, respiratory depression and pinpoint pupils. Naloxone is a 
specific antidote indicated if there is coma or bradypnoea. Naloxone has a 
shorter duration of action than many opioids, so close monitoring and 
repeated injections are required depending on respiratory rate and depth of 
coma; alternatively naloxone may be given by continuous intravenous infusion 
and the rate of infusion adjusted according to vital signs. The effects of some 
opioids such as buprenorphine are only partially reversed by naloxone. 
Methadone has a very long duration of action and patients may need to be 
monitored for long periods after large overdoses. Multiple doses of naloxone 
may be required after overdoses of sustained-release opioid preparations 
(including modified-release morphine sulfate tablets). 
Acute withdrawal syndromes may be precipitated by the use of naloxone in 
patients with a physical dependence on opioids or in overdosage with large 
doses; a withdrawal syndrome may occur in neonates of opioid-dependent 
mothers.  
 

36 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Codeine 
Tablet: 30 mg (phosphate). 

Drug subject to international control under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 
(1961). 

Uses: mild to moderate pain; diarrhoea (section 17.5.3). 
Contraindications: respiratory depression, obstructive airways disease, acute 
asthma attack; where risk of paralytic ileus. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4) and hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); dependence; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); overdosage: section 4.2; interactions: Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Mild to moderate pain, by mouth, ADULT, 30–60 mg every 4 hours when 
necessary; maximum, 240 mg daily; CHILD 1–12 years, 0.5–1 mg/kg every 
4–6 hours when needed; maximum, 240 mg daily.   

Adverse effects: constipation particularly troublesome in long-term use; 
dizziness, nausea, vomiting; difficulty with micturition; ureteric or biliary 
spasm; dry mouth, headaches, sweating, facial flushing; in therapeutic doses, 
codeine is much less liable than morphine to produce tolerance, 
dependence, euphoria, sedation, or other adverse effects. 

Morphine 
Injection: 10 mg (morphine hydrochloride or morphine sulfate) in 1-ml 
ampoule.  
Oral liquid: 10 mg (morphine hydrochloride or morphine sulfate)/5 ml.  
Tablet: 10 mg (morphine sulfate). 
Tablet (prolonged-release): 10 mg; 30 mg; 60 mg (morphine sulfate). 

Drug subject to international control under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 
(1961). 

Uses: severe pain (acute and chronic); myocardial infarction, acute pulmonary 
oedema; adjunct during major surgery and postoperative analgesia. 

Contraindications: avoid in acute respiratory depression, acute alcoholism, and 
where risk of paralytic ileus; also avoid in raised intracranial pressure or 
head injury (affects pupillary responses vital for neurological assessment); 
avoid injection in phaeochromocytoma. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4) and hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); reduce dose or avoid in elderly and debilitated patients; 
dependence (severe withdrawal symptoms can develop if withdrawn 
abruptly); hypothyroidism; convulsive disorders; decreased respiratory 
reserve and acute asthma; hypotension; prostatic hypertrophy; pregnancy 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 37 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); overdosage: section 4.2; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Acute pain, by subcutaneous injection (not suitable for oedematous patients) or by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT, 10 mg every 4 hours if necessary (15 mg for 
heavier well-muscled patients); INFANT up to 1 month, 150 micrograms/kg, 
1–12 months, 200 micrograms/kg; CHILD 1–5 years, 2.5–5 mg, 6–12 years, 
5–10 mg. 

Chronic pain, by mouth (immediate-release tablets) or by subcutaneous injection (not 
suitable for oedematous patients) or by intramuscular injection, ADULT,  
5–20 mg regularly every 4 hours; dose may be increased according to need; 
oral dose should be approximately double corresponding intramuscular 
dose; by mouth (sustained-release tablets), titrate dose first using immediate-
release preparation, then every 12 hours according to daily morphine 
requirement (see note above). 

Myocardial infarction, by slow intravenous injection (2 mg/minute), ADULT, 10 mg 
followed by a further 5–10 mg if necessary; elderly or debilitated patients, 
reduce dose by half. 

Acute pulmonary oedema, by slow intravenous injection (2 mg/minute), ADULT,  
5–10 mg. 

NOTE. The doses stated above refer equally to morphine sulfate and morphine 
hydrochloride. Sustained-release capsules designed for once daily administration are 
also available [not included on the 15th WHO Model List]; consult manufacturer’s 
literature. Dosage requirements should be reviewed if the brand of controlled-release 
preparation is altered. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Sustained-release tablets should be taken at regular intervals and 
not on an as-needed basis for episodic or breakthrough pain. Sustained-release tablets 
should not be crushed. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting (particularly in initial stages), constipation; 
drowsiness; also dry mouth, anorexia, spasm of urinary and biliary tract; 
bradycardia, tachycardia, palpitation, euphoria, decreased libido, rash, 
urticaria, pruritus, sweating, headache, facial flushing, vertigo, postural 
hypotension, hypothermia, hallucinations, confusion, dependence, miosis; 
larger doses produce respiratory depression, hypotension, and muscle 
rigidity. 

 
 
 

38 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

2.3 Medicines used to treat gout 

Acute gout 
Acute attacks of gout are usually treated with high doses of a NSAIM such as 
indomethacin (150–200 mg daily in divided doses); ibuprofen has weaker anti-
inflammatory properties than other NSAIMs and is therefore less suitable for 
treatment of gout. Salicylates, including acetylsalicylic acid are also not suitable 
because they may increase plasmaurate concentrations. Colchicine [not 
included on the 15th WHO Model List] is an alternative for those patients in 
whom NSAIMs are contraindicated. Its use is limited by toxicity with high 
doses. It does not induce fluid retention and can therefore be given to patients 
with heart failure; it can also be given to patients receiving anticoagulants. 

Chronic gout 
For long-term control of gout in patients who have frequent acute attacks, the 
presence of tophi, or chronic gouty arthritis, the xanthine oxidase inhibitor, 
allopurinol, may be used to reduce production of uric acid. Treatment for 
chronic gout should not be started until after an acute attack has completely 
subsided, usually 2–3 weeks. The initiation of allopurinol treatment may 
precipitate an acute attack and therefore a suitable NSAIM or colchicine 
should be used as a prophylactic and continued for at least 1 month after the 
hyperuricaemia has been corrected. If an acute attack develops during 
treatment for chronic gout, then allopurinol should continue at the same 
dosage and the acute attack should be treated in its own right. Treatment for 
chronic gout should be continued indefinitely to prevent further attacks of 
gout. 

Allopurinol 
Tablet: 100 mg. 

Uses: prophylaxis of gout; prophylaxis of hyperuricaemia associated with 
cancer chemotherapy. 

Contraindications: acute gout (if an acute attack occurs while receiving 
allopurinol, continue prophylaxis and treat attack separately). 

Precautions: ensure adequate fluid intake of 2–3 litres daily; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); withdraw treatment if rash 
occurs, reintroduce if rash is mild but discontinue immediately if it recurs; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 39 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Dose:  
Prophylaxis of gout, by mouth, ADULT, initially 100 mg daily as a single dose, 
preferably after food, then adjusted according to plasma or urinary uric acid 
concentration (usual maintenance dose in mild conditions, 100–200 mg 
daily; in moderately severe conditions, 300–600 mg daily; in severe 
conditions; 700–900 mg daily; doses over 300 mg daily given in divided 
doses). 

NOTE. Initiate 2–3 weeks after acute attack has subsided and administer a suitable 
NSAIM (not ibuprofen or a salicylate) or colchicine from the start of allopurinol 
treatment and continue for at least 1 month after correction of hyperuricaemia. 

Prophylaxis of hyperuricaemia in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, 
by mouth, ADULT, maintenance doses as for acute gout, adjusted according to 
response, commencing 24 hours before chemotherapy treatment and 
continuing for 7–10 days afterwards; CHILD under 15 years, 10–20 mg/kg 
daily (maximum, 400 mg daily). 

Adverse effects: rash (see Precautions above); hypersensitivity reactions occur 
rarely and include fever, lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, eosinophilia, 
erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) or toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, vasculitis, hepatitis, renal impairment and, very rarely, seizures; 
gastrointestinal disorders; rarely malaise, headache, vertigo, drowsiness, 
visual and taste disturbances, hypertension, alopecia, hepatotoxicity, 
paraesthesia, neuropathy, gynaecomastia, and blood disorders (including 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, haemolytic anaemia, and aplastic anaemia). 

2.4 Disease-modifying agents used in rheumatoid 
disorders (DMARDs) 

The process of cartilage and bone destruction which occurs in rheumatoid 
arthritis may be reduced by the use of a diverse group of medicines known as 
DMARDs (disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs). DMARDs include 
chloroquine, penicillamine, sulfasalazine and the immunosuppressants, 
azathioprine and methotrexate. 
Treatment should be started early in the course of the disease, before joint 
damage starts. Treatment is usually initiated with a NSAIM when the diagnosis 
is uncertain and the disease course unpredictable. However, when the 
diagnosis, progression, and severity of rheumatic disease have been confirmed, 
a DMARD should be introduced. 
DMARDs do not produce an immediate improvement but require 4–6 months 
of treatment for a full response. Their long-term use is limited by toxicity and 

40 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

loss of efficacy. If one drug does not lead to objective benefit within 6 months, 
it should be discontinued and another DMARD substituted. Adverse reactions 
with DMARDs occur frequently and may be life threatening; careful 
monitoring is needed to avoid severe toxicity. Blood disorders (bone marrow 
suppression) can occur during treatment with many DMARDs; blood counts 
should be carried out before and during treatment, and patients should be 
advised to report without delay any unexplained symptom such as bleeding, 
bruising, purpura, infection, sore throat, or fever. It has been suggested that 
combinations of DMARDs may be more effective than single drugs but 
increased toxicity may be a problem; whether used alone or in combination, 
they should be prescribed only by specialists to ensure that they are used safely 
and to best advantage. 
Sulfasalazine has a beneficial anti-inflammatory effect and is considered by 
some rheumatologists to be a first-line DMARD, but it is poorly tolerated by 
about 25% of patients. Adverse reactions include blood disorders, 
hepatotoxicity, skin reactions, and gastrointestinal disturbances. 
Methotrexate, an immunosuppressant, is considered to be a first-line DMARD; 
at the low doses used for rheumatoid arthritis it is well tolerated but there 
remains the risk of blood disorders and of hepatic and pulmonary toxicity. 
Other immunosuppressant drugs, including azathioprine, are generally 
reserved for use in patients with severe disease who have failed to respond to 
other DMARDs, especially those with extra-cellular manifestations such as 
vasculitis. Immunosuppressants are used in psoriatic arthritis. Adverse 
reactions include blood disorders, alopecia, nausea, and vomiting. 
The antimalarial, chloroquine, is less effective than most other DMARDs, but 
as it is generally better tolerated it may be preferred in the treatment of mild 
rheumatoid arthritis. Chloroquine should not be used for psoriatic arthritis. 
Because long-term therapy can result in retinopathy, ophthalmological 
examinations should be conducted before and during treatment. 
Penicillamine is not a first-line drug and its use is limited by significant adverse 
effects including blood disorders, proteinuria, and rash. 
Corticosteroids (section 18.1) are potent anti-inflammatory drugs but their 
place in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis remains controversial. Their 
usefulness is limited by adverse effects and their use should be controlled by 
specialists. Corticosteroids are usually reserved for use in patients with severe 
disease which has failed to respond to other antirheumatic drugs, or where 
there are severe extra-articular effects such as vasculitis.  
Corticosteroids are also used to control disease activity during initial therapy 
with DMARDs. Although corticosteroids are associated with bone loss this 
appears to be dose-related; recent studies have suggested that a low dose of a 
corticosteroid started during the first 2 years of moderate to severe rheumatoid 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 41 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

arthritis may reduce the rate of joint destruction. The smallest effective dose 
should be used, such as oral prednisolone, 7.5 mg daily for 2–4 years, and at 
the end of treatment the dose should be tapered off slowly to avoid possible 
long-term adverse effects. Relatively high doses of a corticosteroid, in 
combination with cyclophosphamide (see section 8.2), may be needed to 
control vasculitis.  

Azathioprine 
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Azathioprine is a complementary medicine for rheumatoid arthritis. 

Uses: rheumatoid arthritis in cases that have failed to respond to chloroquine 
or penicillamine; psoriatic arthritis; transplant rejection (section 8.1); 
inflammatory bowel disease (section 17.3). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to azathioprine or mercaptopurine 
Precautions: monitor for toxicity throughout treatment; monitor full blood 
counts frequently; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); elderly (reduce dose); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

BONE MARROW SUPPRESSION. Patients should be warned to report immediately 
any signs or symptoms of bone marrow suppression, for example, unexplained bruising 
or bleeding, purpura, infection, or sore throat. 
Dose:  
Administered on expert advice. 
Rheumatoid arthritis, by mouth, ADULT, initially 1.5–2.5 mg/kg daily in divided 
doses, adjusted according to response; maintenance dose, 1–3 mg/kg daily; 
consider withdrawal if no improvement within 3 months. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions requiring immediate and permanent 
withdrawal include malaise, dizziness, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, rigors, 
myalgia, arthralgia, rash, hypotension, and interstitial nephritis; dose-related 
bone marrow suppression; liver impairment, cholestatic jaundice; hair loss 
and increased susceptibility to infections and colitis in patients also 
receiving corticosteroids; nausea; rarely pancreatitis and pneumonitis; 
hepatic veno-occlusive disease; also herpes zoster infection. 

 
 
 
 

42 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Chloroquine 
Tablet: 100 mg; 150 mg (as phosphate or sulfate). 

NOTE. Chloroquine base, 150 mg, is approximately equivalent to chloroquine sulfate, 
200 mg, or chloroquine phosphate, 250 mg.   

Uses: rheumatoid arthritis (including juvenile arthritis); malaria (section 6.5.3). 
Contraindications: psoriatic arthritis.  
Precautions: monitor visual acuity throughout treatment and warn patient to 
report immediately any unexplained visual disturbances; hepatic impairment; 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); neurological disorders including epilepsy; severe 
gastrointestinal disorders; G6PD deficiency; elderly; may exacerbate 
psoriasis and aggravate myasthenia gravis; porphyria; interactions: 
Appendix 1.   

Dose:  

Administered on expert advice. 
NOTE. All doses in terms of chloroquine base. 

Rheumatoid arthritis, by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg daily; maximum, 2.5 mg/kg 
daily; CHILD, up to 3 mg/kg daily.  

NOTE. To avoid excessive dosage in obese patients, the dose of chloroquine should be 
calculated on the basis of lean body weight. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, skin reactions 
(including rash and pruritus); less frequently ECG changes, convulsions, 
visual changes, retinal damage, keratopathy, ototoxicity, hair depigmentation, 
alopecia, and discoloration of skin, nails and mucous membranes; rarely 
blood disorders (including thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and aplastic 
anaemia); mental changes (including emotional disturbances, and psychosis), 
myopathy (including cardiomyopathy and neuromyopathy), acute 
generalized exanthematous pustulosis, exfoliative dermatitis, erythema 
multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome), photosensitivity, and hepatic 
damage; important: arrhythmias and convulsions in overdosage. 

Methotrexate 
Tablet: 2.5 mg (as sodium salt). 

Methotrexate is a complementary medicine for rheumatoid arthritis. 

Uses: rheumatoid arthritis; malignant disease (section 8.2).   
Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
immunodeficiency syndromes; significant pleural effusion or ascites.   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 43 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Precautions: monitor throughout treatment (including blood counts and 
hepatic and renal function tests); renal impairment (avoid if moderate or 
severe, see also Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (avoid if severe; see also 
Appendix 5); reduce dose or withdraw if acute infection develops; advise 
men and women to use contraception during, and for at least 6 months 
after, treatment; peptic ulceration, ulcerative colitis, diarrhoea, ulcerative 
stomatitis; advise patient to avoid self-medication with salicylates or other 
NSAIMs; warn patient with rheumatoid arthritis to report cough or 
dyspnoea; interactions: Appendix 1.   

BONE MARROW SUPPRESSION. Patients should be warned to report immediately 
any signs or symptoms of bone marrow suppression, for example, unexplained bruising 
or bleeding, purpura, infection, or sore throat. 

Dose: Administered on expert advice.   
Rheumatoid arthritis, by mouth, ADULT, 7.5 mg once weekly (as a single dose or 
divided into 3 doses of 2.5 mg given at intervals of 12 hours), adjusted 
according to response; maximum total dose, 20 mg weekly. 

IMPORTANT. The doses are weekly doses and care is required to ensure that the 
correct dose is prescribed and dispensed. 

Adverse effects: blood disorders (bone marrow suppression), liver damage, 
pulmonary toxicity; gastrointestinal disturbances – if stomatitis and 
diarrhoea occur, stop treatment; renal failure; skin reactions, alopecia, 
osteoporosis, arthralgia, myalgia, ocular irritation; precipitation of diabetes. 

Penicillamine 
Capsule or tablet: 250 mg. 

Penicillamine is a complementary medicine for rheumatoid arthritis. 

Uses: severe rheumatoid arthritis; copper and lead poisoning (section 4.2).   
Contraindications: lupus erythematosus.   
Precautions: monitor throughout treatment (including blood counts and urine 
tests); renal impairment (Appendix 4); concomitant nephrotoxic drugs 
(increased risk of toxicity); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); avoid concurrent gold, chloroquine, or immunosuppressive 
treatment; avoid oral iron within 2 hours of a dose; rarely patients 
hypersensitive to penicillin may react to penicillamine; interactions: 
Appendix 1.   

BONE MARROW SUPPRESSION. Patients should be warned to report immediately 
any signs or symptoms of bone marrow suppression, for example, unexplained bruising 
or bleeding, purpura, infection, or sore throat.   

44 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Dose:  

Administered on expert advice. 
Rheumatoid arthritis, by mouth, ADULT, initially 125–250 mg daily before food 
for 1 month, increased by similar amounts at intervals of not less than 
4  weeks to a usual maintenance dose of 500–750 mg daily in divided doses; 
maximum, 1.5 g daily; ELDERLY, initially up to 125 mg daily before food for 
1 month, increased at intervals of not less than 4 weeks; maximum, 1 g daily; 
CHILD 8–12 years, initially 2.5–5 mg/kg daily, gradually increased to a usual 
maintenance dose of 15–20 mg/kg daily at intervals of 4 weeks over a 
period of 3–6 months.   

Adverse effects: initially nausea (reduced if taken before food or on retiring, 
and if initial dose is increased gradually), anorexia, fever and skin reactions; 
taste loss (mineral supplements not recommended); blood disorders 
including thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, agranulocytosis and aplastic 
anaemia; proteinuria, rarely haematuria (withdraw immediately); haemolytic 
anaemia, nephrotic syndrome, lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, 
myasthenia-like syndrome, polymyositis (rarely with cardiac involvement), 
dermatomyositis, mouth ulcers, stomatitis, alopecia, bronchiolitis and 
pneumonitis, pemphigus, glomerulonephritis (Goodpasture syndrome) and 
erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) also reported; male and 
female breast enlargement reported; rash (early rash disappears on 
withdrawal of treatment – reintroduce at a lower dose and increase 
gradually; late rash is more resistant – either reduce dose or withdraw 
treatment). 

Sulfasalazine 
Tablet: 500 mg. 

Sulfasalazine is a complementary medicine for rheumatoid arthritis. 

Uses: severe rheumatoid arthritis; ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease 
(section 17.3). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to salicylates and sulfonamides; severe renal 
impairment; child under 2 years; porphyria. 

Precautions: monitor blood counts and liver function during first 3 months of 
treatment; monitor renal function regularly; renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); history of allergy; 
G6PD deficiency; slow acetylator status; interactions: Appendix 1. 

BONE MARROW SUPPRESSION. Patients should be warned to report immediately 
any signs or symptoms of bone marrow suppression, for example, unexplained bruising 
or bleeding, purpura, infection, or sore throat. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 45 



2. Analgesics, antipyretics, NSAIMs, DMARDs 

Dose:  
Administered on expert advice. 
Rheumatoid arthritis, by mouth (as gastro-resistant tablets), ADULT, initially 
500 mg daily, increased by 500 mg at intervals of 1 week to a maximum of 
2–3 g daily in divided doses. 

Adverse effects: nausea, diarrhoea, headache, loss of appetite; fever; blood 
disorders (including Heinz body anaemia, megaloblastic anaemia, 
leukopenia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia); hypersensitivity reactions 
(including rash, urticaria, erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome), 
exfoliative dermatitis, epidermal necrolysis, pruritus, photosensitization, 
anaphylaxis, serum sickness, interstitial nephritis, and lupus erythematosus-
like syndrome); lung complications (including eosinophilia and fibrosing 
alveolitis); ocular complications (including periorbital oedema); stomatitis, 
parotitis; ataxia, aseptic meningitis, vertigo, tinnitus, alopecia, peripheral 
neuropathy, insomnia, depression, hallucinations; renal effects (including 
proteinuria, crystalluria, and haematuria); oligospermia; rarely acute 
pancreatitis, hepatitis; urine may be coloured orange; some soft contact 
lenses may be stained. 

 

46 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

 

 

 

SECTION 3:  
Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 47 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

The H1-receptor antagonists are generally referred to as antihistamines. They 
inhibit the wheal, pruritus, sneezing, and nasal secretion responses that 
characterize allergy. Antihistamines thus relieve the symptoms of allergic 
reactions, such as urticaria, allergic rhinitis, and allergic conjunctivitis; they also 
control pruritus in skin disorders, such as eczema. Antihistamines are used to 
treat drug allergies, food allergies, insect stings, and some of the symptoms of 
anaphylaxis and angioedema. Drug treatment and other supportive care should 
not be delayed in critically ill patients (see Allergic emergencies below). Specific 
precipitants should be sought and if identified, further exposure avoided and 
desensitization considered. 
In practice, all antihistamines are equally effective in relieving the symptoms of 
allergic reactions and differ mainly in the intensity of their sedative and 
anticholinergic (or more correctly antimuscarinic) effects. Selection of an 
antihistamine should thus be based on the intended therapeutic use, the likely 
adverse reactions, and the cost. Drowsiness and sedation are particular 
disadvantages of the older antihistamines such as chlorphenamine; patients 
should be warned against driving or operating machinery. Newer 
antihistamines do not cause significant sedation. Other central nervous system 
depressants, including alcohol, barbiturates, hypnotics, opioid analgesics, 
anxiolytics, and neuroleptics, may enhance the sedative effects of 
antihistamines. Since antihistamines interfere with skin tests for allergy, they 
should be stopped at least one week before such tests.  
Corticosteroids, such as dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, and prednisolone, 
suppress or prevent almost all symptoms of inflammation associated with 
allergy. The route of administration depends on the particular type of allergic 
condition. For example, for a mild allergic skin reaction, the best therapy may 
be the use of a corticosteroid ointment or cream. If the skin reaction does not 
respond to topical corticosteroid therapy, it may be necessary to give a 
corticosteroid orally.  
Allergic reactions of limited duration and with mild symptoms, such as 
urticaria or allergic rhinitis, usually require no treatment. If on the other hand, 
symptoms become persistent, antihistamines constitute the mainstay of 
treatment. However, oral corticosteroids may be required for a few days in an 
acute attack of urticaria or for severe skin reactions. Oral corticosteroids are 
also used to relieve severe exacerbations in chronic urticaria, but long-term use 
should be avoided.    
Corticosteroids may be used topically to reduce inflammation in allergic 
rhinitis but should only be used systemically for this condition when 
symptoms are disabling.    
Adverse effects associated with long-term use of corticosteroids include 
inhibition of growth in children, disturbances of electrolyte balance (leading to 

48 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

oedema, hypertension, and hypokalaemia), osteoporosis, spontaneous fractures, 
skin thinning, increased susceptibility to infection, mental disturbances, and 
diabetes mellitus. For further information on the disadvantages of 
corticosteroids, see section 18.1.    

Allergic emergencies 
Anaphylactic shock and conditions such as angioedema are medical 
emergencies that can result in cardiovascular collapse and death. They require 
prompt treatment of laryngeal oedema, bronchospasm, and hypotension. 
Atopic individuals are particularly susceptible. Insect stings and certain foods 
including eggs, fish, cow's milk protein, peanuts, and tree nuts are a risk for 
sensitized persons. Therapeutic substances particularly associated with 
anaphylaxis include blood products, vaccines, hyposensitizing (allergen) 
preparations, antibacterials (especially penicillins), iron injections, heparin, and 
neuromuscular blocking drugs. Acetylsalicylic acid and other non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIMs) may cause bronchoconstriction in 
leukotriene-sensitive patients. In the case of drug allergy, anaphylaxis is more 
likely to occur after parenteral administration. Resuscitation facilities should 
always be available when injecting a drug associated with a risk of anaphylactic 
reactions. Anaphylactic reactions may also be associated with additives and 
excipients in foods and medicines. It is wise to check the full formula of 
preparations which may contain allergenic fats or oils.   
First-line treatment of a severe allergic reaction includes administering 
epinephrine (adrenaline), keeping the airway open (with assisted respiration if 
necessary), and restoring blood pressure (by laying the patient flat and raising 
the feet). Epinephrine (adrenaline) should be given immediately by 
intramuscular injection to produce vasoconstriction and bronchodilation; 
injection should be repeated, if necessary, at 5-minute intervals until blood 
pressure, pulse and respiratory function have stabilized. If there is 
cardiovascular shock with inadequate circulation, epinephrine (adrenaline) 
must be given cautiously by slow intravenous injection of a dilute solution. 
Oxygen administration is also of primary importance (see section 1.1).    
An antihistamine (such as chlorphenamine by slow intravenous injection) is a 
useful adjunctive treatment, which should be given after epinephrine 
(adrenaline) injection and continued for 24–48 hours to reduce the severity and 
duration of symptoms and to prevent relapse. The onset of action of an 
intravenous corticosteroid (such as hydrocortisone) is delayed by several hours 
but it should also be given to help prevent later deterioration, especially in 
severely affected patients.    

WHO Model Formulary 2008 49 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

Further treatment of anaphylaxis may include intravenous fluids, an 
intravenous vasopressor such as dopamine (see section 12.4), intravenous 
aminophylline [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] or an injected or 
nebulized bronchodilator, such as salbutamol (see section 25.1).  

 

Steps in the management of anaphylaxis 

 
1. Sympathomimetic 
 Epinephrine (adrenaline), by intramuscular injection using epinephrine 

injection 1:1000, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, 500 micrograms (0.5 ml); 
INFANT under 6 months, 50 micrograms (0.05 ml); CHILD 6 months–
6 years, 120 micrograms (0.12 ml), 6–12 years, 250 micrograms (0.25 ml). 
NOTE. The above doses may be repeated several times if necessary at 5-minute 
intervals, according to blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory function. 

If circulation inadequate, epinephrine (adrenaline) by slow intravenous injection 
using epinephrine injection 1:10 000 (given at a rate of 1 ml/minute), 
ADULT, 500 micrograms (5 ml); CHILD, 10 micrograms/kg (0.1 ml/kg), 
given over several minutes. 

2.  Vital functions 
 Maintain an open airway; give oxygen by mask, restore blood pressure (lay 

patient flat, raise feet).  
Antihistamine, such as chlorphenamine, by intravenous injection over 
1 minute, ADULT, 10–20 mg, repeated if required (maximum total dose, 
40 mg in 24 hours); CHILD 1 month–1 year, 250 micrograms/kg 
(maximum 2.5 mg); CHILD 1–5 years, 2.5–5 mg; CHILD, 6–12 years,  
5–10 mg repeated if necessary up to 4 times daily. 
Corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 
100–300 mg; CHILD up to 1 year, 25 mg; CHILD 1–5 years, 50 mg; CHILD 
6–12 years, 100 mg.  
Intravenous fluids: start infusion with sodium chloride, ADULT and CHILD,  
(0.5–1 litre during the first hour).  
If the patient has asthma-like symptoms, give salbutamol, 2.5–5 mg by 
nebulization or aminophylline, 5 mg/kg by intravenous injection, over at least 
20 minutes. 

 

 
 

50 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

Chlorphenamine 
Injection: 10 mg (hydrogen maleate) in 1-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 4 mg (hydrogen maleate). 

Chlorphenamine is a representative sedative antihistamine. Various medicines can serve 
as alternatives. 

Uses: symptomatic relief of allergy, allergic rhinitis (hay fever) and 
conjunctivitis, urticaria, insect stings, and pruritus of allergic origin; adjunct 
in the emergency treatment of anaphylactic shock and severe angioedema. 

Precautions: prostate enlargement, urinary retention; ileus or pyloroduodenal 
obstruction; glaucoma; child under 1 year; pregnancy (Appendix 2); and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); epilepsy; interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Allergy, by mouth, ADULT, 4 mg every 4–6 hours (maximum, 24 mg daily); 

CHILD under 1 year, not recommended; CHILD 1–2 years, 1 mg twice daily; 
CHILD 2–5 years, 1 mg every 4–6 hours (maximum 6 mg daily); CHILD  
6–12 years, 2 mg every 4–6 hours (maximum 12 mg daily). 

Allergic reactions, anaphylaxis (adjunct), by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or 
intravenous injection, ADULT, 10–20 mg (maximum 40 mg in 24 hours); CHILD 
1 month–1 year, 250 micrograms/kg (maximum 2.5 mg); CHILD 1–5 years, 
2.5–5 mg; CHILD 6–12 years, 5–10 mg. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. Give intravenous injection over 1 minute; if 
necessary, injection solution can be diluted with sodium chloride, 0.9% injection. 

Adverse effects: drowsiness (rarely paradoxical stimulation with high doses, or 
in children or the elderly), hypotension, headache, dizziness, palpitations, 
psychomotor impairment, urinary retention, dry mouth, blurred vision, 
gastrointestinal disturbances; liver dysfunction; blood disorders; also rash 
and photosensitivity reactions, sweating and tremor; hypersensitivity 
reactions including bronchospasm, angioedema and anaphylaxis; injections 
may be irritant. 

Dexamethasone 
Injection: 4 mg dexamethasone phosphate (as disodium salt) in 1-ml 
ampoule. 

Uses: adjunct in the emergency treatment of anaphylaxis; short-term 
suppression of inflammation in allergic disorders; for other indications, see 
section 18.1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 51 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

Contraindications: untreated systemic infection (unless condition life-
threatening); administration of live virus vaccines. 

Precautions: increased susceptibility to, and severity of, infection; activation or 
exacerbation of tuberculosis, amoebiasis and strongyloidiasis; risk of severe 
chickenpox in non-immune patients (varicella-zoster immunoglobulin 
required if exposed to chickenpox); avoid exposure to measles (normal 
immunoglobulin possibly required if exposed); diabetes mellitus; peptic 
ulcer; hypertension; corneal perforation; for further precautions relating to 
long-term use of corticosteroids see section 18.1. 

Dose:  
Allergy (short-term use), by mouth, ADULT, usual range 0.5–10 mg daily as a 
single dose in the morning; CHILD, 10–100 micrograms/kg daily. 

Anaphylaxis (adjunct), by slow intravenous injection or infusion (as dexamethasone 
phosphate), ADULT, 0.5–24 mg; CHILD, 200–400 micrograms/kg. 

Adverse effects: nausea, dyspepsia, malaise, hiccups; hypersensitivity reactions 
including anaphylaxis; perineal irritation after intravenous administration; 
for adverse effects associated with low-dose, long-term corticosteroid 
treatment see section 18.1. 

Epinephrine (adrenaline) 
Injection: 1 mg (as hydrochloride or hydrogen tartrate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

NOTE: Different dilutions of epinephrine injection are used for different routes of 
administration. 

Uses: severe anaphylactic reaction; severe angioedema; cardiac arrest 
(section 12.2). 

Precautions: hyperthyroidism, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart disease, 
arrhythmias, cerebrovascular disease; second stage of labour; elderly. 

Interactions: Severe anaphylaxis in patients on non-cardioselective beta-
blockers, for example propranolol, may not respond to epinephrine 
(adrenaline) injection calling for intravenous injection of salbutamol (section 
25.1). Furthermore, epinephrine (adrenaline) may cause severe hypertension 
in those receiving beta-blockers. Patients on tricyclic antidepressants are 
considerably more susceptible to arrhythmias, calling for a much reduced 
dose of adrenaline. See also Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Anaphylaxis, by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection of 1:1000 epinephrine 
injection, see Steps in the Management of Anaphylaxis for doses. 

Anaphylaxis, by slow intravenous injection of 1:10 000 epinephrine injection. This 
route should be reserved for severely ill patients when there is doubt about 

52 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

the adequacy of circulation and absorption from the intramuscular site, see 
Steps in the Management of Anaphylaxis for doses. 

Adverse effects: tachycardia and arrhythmias, hypertension, tremor, anxiety, 
sweating, nausea, vomiting, weakness, hyperglycaemia, dizziness and 
pulmonary oedema have all been reported; headache common. 

Hydrocortisone 
Powder for injection: 100 mg (as sodium succinate) in vial. 

Uses: adjunct in the emergency treatment of anaphylaxis; inflammatory skin 
conditions (section 13.3); inflammatory bowel disease (section 17.3); 
adrenocortical insufficiency (section 18.1). 

Contraindications: not relevant to emergency use but for contraindications 
relating to long-term use, see section 18.1. 

Precautions: not relevant to emergency use but for precautions relating to low-
dose, long-term use, see section 18.1. 

Dose:  

Anaphylaxis (adjunct), by slow intravenous injection as a single dose, see Steps in 
the Management of Anaphylaxis. 

Adverse effects: for adverse effects associated with long-term corticosteroid 
treatment, see section 18.1. 

Prednisolone 
Tablet: 5 mg; 25 mg. 

Prednisolone is a representative corticosteroid. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: short-term suppression of inflammation in allergic disorders; longer-
term suppression (section 18.1); malignant disease (section 8.3); 
inflammation of the eye (section 21.2). 

Contraindications: untreated systemic infection; administration of live virus 
vaccines. 

Precautions: increased susceptibility to, and severity of, infection; activation or 
exacerbation of tuberculosis, amoebiasis, and strongyloidiasis; risk of severe 
chickenpox in non-immune patients (varicella-zoster immunoglobulin required 
if exposed to chickenpox); avoid exposure to measles (normal immunoglobulin 
possibly required if exposed); diabetes mellitus; peptic ulcer; hypertension; 
corneal perforation; for further precautions, in particular, those relating to low-
dose long-term use of corticosteroids, see section 18.1. 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 53 



3. Antiallergics and medicines used in anaphylaxis 

Dose:  

Allergy (short-term use), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, initially up to 10–20 mg 
daily as a single dose in the morning (in severe allergy, up to 60 mg daily as 
a short course of 5–10 days). 

Adverse effects: nausea, dyspepsia, malaise, hiccups; hypersensitivity reactions 
including anaphylaxis; for adverse effects associated with long-term 
corticosteroid treatment, see section 18.1. 

 
 

54 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

 

 

 

SECTION 4:  
Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

 

4.1 Non-specific 56 

4.2 Specific 58 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 55 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

These notes are only guidelines and it is strongly recommended that poisons 
information centres be consulted in cases where there is doubt about the 
degree of risk or about appropriate management. 

4.1 Non-specific 

Ideally, all patients who show features of poisoning should be admitted to 
hospital. Patients who have taken poisons with delayed action should also be 
admitted, even if they appear well; delayed-action poisons include 
acetylsalicylic acid, iron, lithium, paracetamol, paraquat, tricyclic 
antidepressants, and warfarin. The effects of modified-release or prolonged-
release preparations are also delayed. It is often impossible to establish with 
certainty the identity of the poison and the size of the dose but information on 
the type and timing of poisoning may be useful for symptomatic management. 
Few patients require active removal of the poison.  
Most patients must be treated symptomatically and monitored. Particular care 
must be given to maintenance of respiration and blood pressure. Assisted 
ventilation may be required. Cardiac conduction defects and arrhythmias often 
respond to correction of underlying hypoxia, acidosis, or other biochemical 
abnormalities. Hypothermia which may develop in patients who have been 
unconscious for some hours is best treated by wrapping the patient in blankets 
to conserve body heat. Convulsions which are prolonged or recurrent may be 
controlled by intravenous diazepam (see section 5).  
In rare situations removal of the poison from the stomach by gastric lavage 
may be appropriate (see below). More commonly activated charcoal, which can 
bind many poisons in the stomach and therefore prevent absorption is the 
preferred course of treatment for poisoning. Active elimination techniques 
such as repeated administration of activated charcoal can enhance the 
elimination of some drugs after they have been absorbed (see below). Other 
techniques to enhance elimination of poisons after their absorption are only 
practical in hospital and are only suitable for a small number of patients and a 
limited number of poisons. Methods include haemodialysis and 
haemoperfusion. Alkalinization of urine can be used to increase the 
elimination of salicylates. Forced alkaline diuresis is no longer recommended.  

Gastric lavage  
Gastric lavage is rarely required and should only be considered if a life-
threatening amount of a substance that cannot be removed effectively by other 
means (for example, iron), has been ingested within the last hour. Gastric 
emptying is clearly unnecessary if the risk of toxicity is small or if the patient 

56 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

presents too late. The main risk is inhalation of stomach contents and thus 
gastric lavage should not be undertaken unless the airway can be protected 
adequately. Gastric lavage must not be attempted after corrosive poisoning or 
for hydrocarbon products which could be dangerous if aspirated.  

Emesis  
Induction of emesis for the treatment of poisoning is not recommended. 
There is no evidence that it affects absorption of the poison and it may 
increase the risk of aspiration. Furthermore, the effects of the emetic 
substance may complicate diagnosis.  

Prevention of absorption  
Given by mouth activated charcoal can bind many poisons in the 
gastrointestinal system, thereby reducing their absorption. Generally speaking 
the sooner it is given, the more effective it is, and is most effective if 
administered within one hour of ingestion of the poison. It may be effective 
several hours after poisoning with modified-release preparations or drugs with 
anticholinergic (antimuscarinic) properties. It is relatively safe and particularly 
useful for prevention of absorption of poisons which are toxic in small 
amounts, for example, antidepressants. Furthermore, repeated doses of 
activated charcoal enhance the faecal elimination of some drugs (that undergo 
enterohepatic or enteroenteric recycling) several hours after ingestion and after 
they have been absorbed, for example, phenobarbital and theophylline. 

Charcoal, activated 
Powder. 

Uses: treatment of acute poisoning. 
Contraindications: poisoning by hydrocarbons with high potential for harm if 
aspirated; poisoning by corrosive substances (may prevent visualization of 
lesions caused by the poison). 

Precautions: drowsy or unconscious patients (risk of aspiration; intubate 
before administration via nasogastric or gastric tube); not effective for 
poisoning with alcohols, clofenotane (dicophane, DDT), cyanides, 
malathion, and metal salts including those of iron and lithium. 

Dose:  
Poisoning (reduction of absorption), by mouth, as soon as possible after 
ingestion of poison, ADULT, 50–100 g as a single dose; INFANT, 1 g/kg as a 
single dose; CHILD 1–12 years, 25 g as a single dose (50 g in severe 
poisoning). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 57 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Poisoning (active elimination), by mouth, ADULT, 50 g every 4 hours (in case of 
intolerance 25 g every 2 hours); INFANT, 1 g/kg every 4–6 hours; CHILD 
over 1 year, 25–50 g every 4–6 hours. 

Adverse effects: black stools; vomiting, constipation or diarrhoea; 
pneumonitis (due to aspiration). 

4.2 Specific 

Paracetamol overdosage  
As little as 10–15 g or 150 mg/kg of paracetamol taken within 24 hours may 
cause severe hepatocellular necrosis and much less frequently, renal tubular 
necrosis. The only early features of poisoning, nausea and vomiting, usually 
settle within 24 hours. Persistence beyond this time, often with the onset of 
right subcostal pain and tenderness, usually indicates the development of liver 
damage which is maximal 3–4 days after ingestion. In spite of a lack of 
significant early symptoms, patients who have taken an overdose of 
paracetamol should be transferred to hospital urgently.  
Administration of activated charcoal should be considered if paracetamol in 
excess of 150 mg/kg or 12 g, whichever is smaller, is thought to have been 
ingested within the previous hour (see section 4.1).  
Acetylcysteine protects the liver if given within 24 hours of ingesting 
paracetamol. Acetylcysteine, given intravenously, is most effective within 
8 hours of overdosage after which its effectiveness declines sharply. 
Alternatively, in remote areas, if acetylcysteine cannot be given promptly,  
DL-methionine may be given by mouth provided the overdose was ingested 
within 10–12 hours and the patient is not vomiting. However, acetylcysteine is 
the preferred treatment. Concurrent use of activated charcoal and specific oral 
antidotes should be avoided. Once the patient is in hospital, the need to 
continue antidote treatment can be assessed from plasma paracetamol 
concentration. 

Opioid analgesic overdosage  
Opioids cause coma, respiratory depression and pinpoint pupils. Naloxone is a 
specific antidote indicated if there is coma or bradypnoea. Naloxone has a 
shorter duration of action than many opioids, so close monitoring and 
repeated injections are required depending on respiratory rate and depth of 
coma; alternatively naloxone may be given by continuous intravenous infusion 
and the rate of infusion adjusted according to vital signs. The effects of some 
opioids, such as buprenorphine, are only partially reversed by naloxone. 

58 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Methadone has a very long duration of action and patients may need to be 
monitored for long periods after large overdoses.  
Acute withdrawal syndromes may be precipitated by the use of naloxone in 
patients with a physical dependence on opioids or in overdosage with large 
doses; a withdrawal syndrome may occur in neonates of opioid-dependent 
mothers.  

Organophosphate and carbamate poisoning  
Organophosphates are absorbed through the bronchi and intact skin as well as 
from the gastrointestinal tract. Initial treatment of organophosphate or 
carbamate poisoning includes prevention of further absorption by moving the 
patient to fresh air, removing contaminated clothing, and washing 
contaminated skin. A clear airway must be maintained. Gastric lavage may be 
considered if the airway is protected.  
Organophosphates inhibit cholinesterases and thus prolong the effects of 
acetylcholine. Toxicity depends on the particular compound involved, and 
onset after skin exposure may be delayed. Atropine will reverse the muscarinic 
effects of acetylcholine and is used (in conjunction with oximes such as 
pralidoxime and additional symptomatic treatment).  
Additional treatment for carbamate poisoning is generally symptomatic and 
supportive. Atropine may be given but may not be required because of the 
rapidly reversible type of cholinesterase inhibition produced.  

Iron poisoning and iron and aluminium overload  
Mortality from iron poisoning is reduced by specific therapy with 
deferoxamine which chelates iron. Before administration of deferoxamine, the 
stomach should be emptied by gastric lavage (with a wide-bore tube), 
preferably within one hour of ingesting a significant quantity of iron or if 
radiography reveals tablets in the stomach. Deferoxamine is also used to 
diagnose and treat chronic iron overload. It is used in the diagnosis of 
aluminium overload and to treat aluminium overload in patients with end-stage 
renal failure undergoing maintenance haemodialysis.  

Heavy metal poisoning  
Heavy metal poisoning may be treated with a range of antidotes including 
dimercaprol, penicillamine, potassium ferric hexacyanoferrate, and sodium 
calcium edetate. Penicillamine is also used to promote excretion of copper in 
Wilson disease.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 59 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Methaemoglobinaemia  
Methylthioninium chloride can lower the levels of methaemoglobin in red 
blood cells and is used in the treatment of methaemoglobinaemia. In large 
doses, it may cause methaemoglobinaemia and therefore methaemoglobin 
levels should be monitored during treatment. 

Cyanide poisoning  
Cyanide poisoning may be treated with sodium nitrite followed by sodium 
thiosulfate.  

Acetylcysteine 
Injection: 200 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

Uses: paracetamol overdosage. 
Precautions: asthma (see Adverse effects below, but do not delay treatment).  
Dose:  

Paracetamol overdosage, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, initially 
150 g/kg over 15 minutes, then 50 mg/kg over 4 hours, then 100 mg/kg 
over 16 hours. 

ADMINISTRATION. Dilute requisite dose in glucose intravenous infusion solution, 
5% as follows: ADULT and CHILD over 12 years, initially 200 ml given over 15 minutes, 
then 500 ml over 4 hours, then 1 litre over 16 hours: CHILD under 12 years with a body 
weight over 20 kg, initially 100 ml given over 15 minutes, then 250 ml over 4 hours, 
then 500 ml over 16 hours; CHILD under 12 years with a body weight under 20 kg, 
initially 3 ml/kg given over 15 minutes, then 7 ml/kg over 4 hours, then 14 ml/kg over 
16 hours.  

NOTE. Manufacturer may recommend other infusion fluids, but glucose solution, 5% 
is preferable.  

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity-like reactions may be managed by reducing 
infusion rate or suspending infusion until reaction has settled (specialist 
advice may be needed); rash may be managed with an antihistamine, for 
example chlorphenamine, and acute asthma with a short-acting beta2-
agonist, such as salbutamol (see section 25.1). 

Atropine 
Injection: 1 mg (sulfate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: organophosphate and carbamate poisoning; preoperative and 
intraoperative medication (section 1.3); mydriasis and cycloplegia 
(section 21.5). 

60 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Precautions: children, the elderly, Down syndrome; angle-closure glaucoma; 
myasthenia gravis; gastrointestinal disorders; prostatic enlargement; cardiac 
disorders; hypoxia; pyrexia and in warm environments (monitor 
temperature and keep patients cool); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Organophosphate poisoning, by intramuscular or intravenous injection (depending 
on severity of poisoning), ADULT, 2 mg (CHILD, 20 micrograms/kg) every 
5–10 minutes until the skin becomes flushed and dry, the pupils dilate, and 
tachycardia develops. 

Calcium gluconate 
Injection: 100 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

See section 27. 

Deferoxamine 
Powder for injection: 500 mg (mesilate) in vial. 

Uses: acute iron poisoning; chronic iron overload; aluminium overload. 
Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); eye and ear examinations are 
advised before and at 3-month intervals during treatment; aluminium 
encephalopathy (may exacerbate neurological dysfunction); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); children under 3 years (may 
retard growth). 

Dose: 
Acute iron poisoning, by slow intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, initially 
15 mg/kg/hour, reduced after 4–6 hours so that total dose does not exceed 
80 mg/kg in 24 hours. 

Chronic iron overload, by subcutaneous or intravenous infusion ADULT and CHILD, 
lowest effective dose (usually within range of 20–60 mg/kg/day) 4–7 days a 
week. 

Aluminium overload in end-stage renal failure, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and 
CHILD, 5 mg/kg, once a week during last hour of dialysis. 

Diagnosis of iron overload, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 500 mg. 
Diagnosis of aluminium overload, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, 
5 mg/kg during last hour of dialysis. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. For full details and warnings relating to administration for therapeutic or 
diagnostic purposes, consult manufacturer’s literature. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 61 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Adverse effects: hypotension (especially when given too rapidly by 
intravenous injection), disturbances of hearing and vision (including lens 
opacity and retinopathy); injection-site reactions, gastrointestinal 
disturbances, asthma, fever, headache, arthralgia and myalgia; very rarely 
anaphylaxis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, neurological disturbances 
(including dizziness, neuropathy, and paraesthesia), Yersinia and 
mucormycosis infections, rash, renal impairment, and blood dyscrasias. 

Dimercaprol 
Injection in oil: 50 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 

Uses: acute poisoning by antimony, arsenic, bismuth, gold, mercury, possibly 
thallium; adjunct (with sodium calcium edetate) in lead poisoning. 

Contraindications: iron, selenium, and cadmium poisoning; severe hepatic 
impairment (unless due to arsenic poisoning; see also Appendix 5). 

Precautions: hypertension; renal impairment (discontinue or use with extreme 
caution if impairment develops during treatment; see also Appendix 4); any 
abnormal reaction such as hyperpyrexia should be assessed; the elderly; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Poisoning by heavy metals, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 2.5–
3 mg/kg every 4 hours for 2 days, 3 mg/kg 2–4  times on the third day, 
then 3 mg/kg 1–2 times daily for 10 days or until recovery. 

Adverse effects: hypertension, tachycardia; malaise, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, salivation, lacrimation, sweating, burning sensation in the 
mouth, throat, and eyes; feeling of constriction in the throat and chest; 
headache, muscle spasms, tingling of the extremities; fever in children; local 
pain and abscess at injection site. 

DL-methionine 
Tablet: 250 mg. 

Uses: paracetamol overdosage. 
Precautions: severe liver disease (may precipitate hepatic encephalopathy); 
avoid concurrent use with activated charcoal. 

Dose: Paracetamol overdosage, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 6 years, 2.5 g 
initially, followed by 3 further doses of 2.5 g every 4 hours, CHILD under 
6 years, 1 g initially, followed by 3 further doses of 1 g every 4 hours. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, irritability. 

62 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) 
Injection: 10 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

Uses: acute methaemoglobinaemia. 
Contraindications: severe renal impairment; methaemoglobinaemia due to 
chlorate or induced by sodium nitrite in treatment of cyanide poisoning. 

Precautions: G6PD deficiency (may cause haemolytic anaemia); monitor 
blood methaemoglobin throughout treatment; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Dose:  
Acute methaemoglobinaemia, by slow intravenous injection over several minutes 

ADULT and CHILD, 1–2 mg/kg as a single dose; may be repeated after 
1 hour if required. 

ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, chest pain, headache, 
dizziness, confusion, profuse sweating; hypertension or hypotension 
reported; haemolytic anaemia (in G6PD deficiency); methaemoglobinaemia 
(with high dosage); bluish skin discoloration; blue saliva, urine and faeces. 

Naloxone 
Injection: 400 micrograms/ml (hydrochloride) in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: opioid overdosage; postoperative respiratory depression (section 25.2). 
Precautions: physical dependence on opioids or other situations where acute 
withdrawal syndrome may be precipitated (see above); cardiovascular 
disease; pregnancy (Appendix 2). 

Dose:  
Overdosage of opioids, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 0.4–2 mg repeated at 
intervals of 2–3 minutes up to a maximum of 10 mg; question diagnosis if 
respiratory function does not improve; CHILD, 10 micrograms/kg; a 
subsequent dose of 100 micrograms/kg may be given if no response. 

NOTE. Naloxone hydrochloride may be administered in the same doses by 
intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, but only if the intravenous route is not 
feasible (slower onset of action). 

Overdosage of opioids, by continuous intravenous infusion using an infusion pump, 
ADULT, 10 mg diluted in 50 ml glucose intravenous infusion solution, 5% at 
a rate adjusted according to response [initial infusion rate may be set to 
deliver 60% of intravenous dose (see above) over 1 hour)]. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, and sweating (may also be due to opioid 
withdrawal). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 63 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Penicillamine 
Capsule or tablet: 250 mg. 

Uses: poisoning by heavy metals, particularly lead and copper; Wilson disease; 
severe rheumatoid arthritis (section 2.4). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity; lupus erythematosus. 
Precautions: monitor throughout treatment (including blood counts and urine 
tests); renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid concurrent gold, chloroquine or 
immunosuppressive treatment; avoid oral iron within 2 hours of a dose; 
penicillin hypersensitivity (risk of cross-reactivity); interactions: Appendix 1. 

BLOOD COUNTS. In Wilson disease, consider withdrawal if platelet count falls below 
120 000/mm3 or white blood cells fall below 2500/mm3 or if 3 successive falls are 
recorded (can restart at reduced dose when counts return to within a reference range 
but permanent withdrawal is necessary if neutropenia or thrombocytopenia recur). 

PATIENT ADVICE. In Wilson disease, warn patient to tell doctor immediately if sore 
throat, fever, infection, non-specific illness, unexplained bleeding and bruising, purpura, 
mouth ulcers, or rash develop. 
Dose:  
Lead poisoning, by mouth, ADULT, 1–2 g daily in divided doses before food 
(continue until urinary lead stabilized at less than 500 micrograms/day); 
CHILD, 20 mg/kg daily in divided doses. 

Wilson disease, by mouth, ADULT, 1.5–2 g daily in divided doses before food 
(maximum, 2 g daily for 1 year), thereafter 0.75–1 g daily; ELDERLY, 
20 mg/kg daily in divided doses adjusted according to response; CHILD, up 
to 20 mg/kg daily in divided doses (minimum, 500 mg daily). 

Adverse effects: initially nausea (less of a problem if taken with food and on 
retiring), anorexia, fever and skin reactions; taste loss (mineral supplements 
not recommended); blood disorders including thrombocytopenia, 
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and aplastic anaemia; proteinuria, rarely 
haematuria (withdraw immediately); haemolytic anaemia, nephrotic 
syndrome, lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, myasthenia gravis-like 
syndrome, polymyositis (rarely with cardiac involvement), dermatomyositis, 
mouth ulcers, stomatitis, alopecia, bronchiolitis and pneumonitis, 
pemphigus, Goodpasture syndrome, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome also 
reported; male and female breast enlargement reported; in non-rheumatic 
conditions rheumatoid arthritis-like syndrome also reported; rash early in 
treatment (usually allergic – may need temporary withdrawal), late rash 
(reduce dose or withdraw treatment). 

64 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Potassium ferric hexacyanoferrate (II)2H20 (Prussian blue) 
Powder for oral administration. 

Uses: thallium poisoning. 
Contraindications: constipation; paralytic ileus. 
Dose:  
Treatment of thallium poisoning, by duodenal tube, ADULT, 125 mg/kg in 100 ml 
of mannitol, 15% twice daily (until urinary thallium stabilized at 
500 micrograms/day or less). 

Adverse effects: constipation, dark stools. 

Sodium calcium edetate 
Injection: 200 mg/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 

Uses: lead poisoning. 
Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4). 
Dose:  
Treatment of lead poisoning, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, up to 
40 mg/kg twice daily for up to 5 days; repeated if necessary after interval of 
48 hours. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: renal tubular necrosis; nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal cramps; 
pain at injection site, thrombophlebitis (if given too rapidly or as too 
concentrated a solution), fever, malaise, headache, myalgia, thirst, chills, 
histamine-like responses (sneezing, nasal congestion, lacrimation) and 
transient hypotension. 

Sodium nitrite 
Injection: 30 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

Uses: cyanide poisoning (together with sodium thiosulfate). 
Precautions: monitor plasma methaemoglobin levels; severe cardiovascular or 
cerebrovascular disease. 

Dose:  

Cyanide poisoning, by slow intravenous injection over 5–20 minutes, ADULT, 
300 mg (followed by sodium thiosulfate); further dose of 150 mg after 
30 minutes if symptoms recur; CHILD, 4–10 mg/kg (initially lower dose). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 65 



4. Antidotes and other substances used in poisonings 

Adverse effects: vasodilatation resulting in syncope, hypotension, tachycardia, 
flushing, and headache; methaemoglobinaemia; cyanosis, dyspnoea, 
tachypnoea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain. 

Sodium thiosulfate 
Injection: 250 mg/ml in 50-ml ampoule. 

Uses: cyanide poisoning (together with sodium nitrite); pityriasis versicolor 
(section 13.1) 

Dose:  

Cyanide poisoning, after administration of sodium nitrite, by slow intravenous 
injection over about 10 minutes, ADULT, 12.5 g; further dose of 6.25 g after 
30 minutes if symptoms recur; CHILD, 400 mg/kg. 

 
 

66 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

 

 

 

SECTION 5:  
Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 67 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Control of epilepsy   
Treatment should always commence with a single drug, the choice of which 
can only be made on an individual basis and will depend on the efficacy of the 
drug and the patient’s tolerance of treatment. If a drug fails to control the 
seizures after it has been used in full therapeutic dosage for an adequate period, 
or if it is not tolerated, it should be gradually substituted with another, with the 
first drug being withdrawn only when the new regimen is mainly established. If 
monotherapy is ineffective, two drugs should be given in combination. Several 
regimens may need to be tried before the most appropriate is found.  
The initial dose of the chosen drug should be determined on the basis of the 
degree of urgency, the size and the age of the patient. It should be increased 
gradually until an effective response is obtained. All antiepileptics commonly 
produce neurological adverse effects at too high a dose, and patients should be 
monitored closely for adverse effects to help in accurate dose titration. 
However, except for phenytoin, it is rarely useful to measure plasma drug 
concentrations as an aid to dose adjustment. Non-compliance because of 
inappropriate dosing and overdosing is a major impediment to effective 
antiepileptic treatment. Patients should ideally remain under supervision 
throughout treatment.  

Withdrawal  

Treatment is normally continued for a minimum of two years after the last 
seizure. Withdrawal should be extended over a period of several months 
because abrupt withdrawal can lead to complications such as status epilepticus. 
In patients receiving several antiepileptic drugs, only one drug should be 
withdrawn at a time. Many adult patients relapse once treatment is withdrawn 
and it may be necessary to continue treatment indefinitely, particularly when 
the patient’s livelihood or lifestyle can be endangered by recurrence of a 
seizure. 

Pregnancy and breastfeeding  

Untreated epilepsy during pregnancy may cause harm to the fetus; there is 
therefore no justification for abrupt withdrawal of treatment in women who 
become pregnant, although withdrawal of therapy may be an option if the 
patient has been seizure-free for at least two years; resumption of treatment 
may be considered after the first trimester. If antiepileptics are continued in 
pregnancy, monotherapy with the lowest effective dose is preferred, with 
adjustment made to take account of changes in plasma drug concentration 
associated with pregnancy. There is an increased risk of birth defects with the 
use of antiepileptics, particularly with carbamazepine, valproic acid and 
phenytoin. However, if there is good seizure control, there is probably no 
advantage in changing pregnant patients’ antiepileptic drugs. In view of the 

68 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

risks of neural tube and other defects, patients who may become pregnant 
should be informed of the risks and referred for advice, and pregnant patients 
should be offered counselling and antenatal screening. To counteract the risk 
of neural tube defects, adequate folate supplements are advised for women 
before and during pregnancy (see section 10.1). In view of the risk of neonatal 
bleeding associated with carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and phenytoin, 
prophylactic phytomenadione (vitamin K1) is recommended for the neonate 
and the mother before delivery (see section 10.2). Antiepileptic drugs can be 
continued during breastfeeding (see also Appendix 3). 

Driving  

Regulations are in place in many countries which may, for example, restrict 
driving by patients with epilepsy to those whose seizures are controlled. 
Furthermore, antiepileptic and anticonvulsant drugs may cause central nervous 
system depression, particularly in the early stages of treatment and patients 
affected by adverse effects such as drowsiness or dizziness should not operate 
machinery or drive. 

Choice of antiepileptic in the management of convulsive 
disorders  

Generalized tonic–clonic, simple partial, and complex partial 
seizures  

Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and valproic acid are widely used 
in the treatment of these conditions. However, each of these drugs is 
associated with dose-related and idiosyncratic adverse effects and monitoring 
of haematological and hepatic function is often advised, particularly for 
carbamazepine and valproic acid. 

Absence seizures  

Both ethosuximide and valproic acid are widely used in the treatment of 
absence seizures (petit mal) and are usually well tolerated. However, 
ethosuximide can, rarely, cause lupus erythematosus and psychoses which call 
for immediate, but cautious, discontinuation. Moreover, as absence seizures 
are commonly associated with tonic–clonic seizures, valproic acid is often 
preferred since it is effective in both disorders. 

Tonic seizures, atonic seizures, and atypical absence seizures  

Phenobarbital and phenytoin are widely used for tonic seizures, and valproic 
acid for atonic seizures and for atypical absence seizures. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 69 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Myoclonic seizures  

Valproic acid is widely used and most effective for juvenile myoclonic seizures. 
However, both valproic acid and this type of seizure are associated with a high 
relapse rate and it is often necessary to continue therapy indefinitely. Other 
myoclonic seizures are often resistant to treatment and some do not have an 
epileptic basis. Valproic acid can be of value in this case and other antiepileptic 
drugs may be useful in intractable cases. 

Infantile spasm (infantile myoclonic epilepsy)  

Infantile spasms, which are often associated with severe brain damage, can be 
resistant to antiepileptic drugs. Vigabatrin [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List] or valproic acid (alone or in combination with clonazepam [not 
included on the 15th WHO Model List]) are used. 

Febrile convulsions  

Brief febrile convulsions usually respond to sponging with tepid water and by 
giving an antipyretic such as paracetamol (see section 2.1). Recurrent febrile 
convulsions or prolonged convulsions (those lasting 15 minutes or longer) are 
treated with diazepam, either rectally in solution or by intravenous injection, to 
prevent possible brain damage. 
Intermittent prophylaxis, with diazepam administered at the onset of fever, may 
prevent recurrence of febrile convulsions but only in a small proportion of 
children and its routine use in this way is not recommended. Use of 
antiepileptics for continuous prophylaxis is controversial; it is probably indicated 
in only a small proportion of children including those whose first seizure 
occurred during the first 14 months of life, or who already have evident 
neurological abnormalities, or who have had previous prolonged or focal 
convulsions. Phenobarbital may be used for this purpose but careful clinical 
monitoring and dosage adjustment are necessary in order to minimize the risk 
of adverse effects. Valproic acid, although effective, is not recommended 
because of the greater risk of hepatotoxicity in young children.  

Status epilepticus 
Status epilepticus is a medical emergency which carries a high mortality rate. 
Initial management includes positioning the patient to avoid injury, supporting 
respiration (including provision of oxygen), maintaining blood pressure, and 
the correction of any hypoglycaemia; maintenance of the airway and assisted 
ventilation are crucial even when the seizures are controlled, because the drugs 
used in their management may also depress respiration. The use of parenteral 
thiamine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] should be considered if 
alcohol abuse is suspected; pyridoxine should be administered if the status 
epilepticus is likely to be responsive to pyridoxine (see section 27).  

70 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Intravenous diazepam is often effective in status epilepticus. Diazepam, which 
acts rapidly, should be administered first and should be followed immediately 
by a loading dose of phenytoin which has a longer-acting effect. When 
cannulation is impossible, diazepam may be administered rectally as a solution 
(absorption from suppositories is too slow for treatment of status epilepticus). 
Intravenous phenobarbital is also effective but is more likely to cause 
respiratory depression; it is used in refractory cases but should be avoided in 
patients who have recently received oral phenobarbital. Rectal paraldehyde  
[not included on the 15th WHO Model List] may also be used; it causes little 
respiratory depression and is therefore useful where facilities for resuscitation 
are poor.  
If seizures continue despite treatment, general anaesthesia may be required. 
The underlying cause must be identified and remedied in all cases.  

Eclampsia and pre-eclampsia 

Magnesium sulfate has a major role in eclampsia for the prevention of 
recurrent seizures. Monitoring of blood pressure, respiratory rate, and urinary 
output is necessary, as is monitoring for clinical signs of overdosage (loss of 
patellar reflexes, weakness, nausea, sensation of warmth, flushing, double 
vision and slurred speech. Calcium gluconate injection (section 27) is used for 
the management of magnesium toxicity. 
Magnesium sulfate is also used in women with pre-eclampsia who are at risk of 
developing eclampsia; careful monitoring of the patient (as described above) is 
necessary. 

Carbamazepine 
Oral liquid: 100 mg/5 ml. 
Tablet (chewable): 100 mg; 200 mg. 
Tablet (scored): 100 mg; 200 mg. 

Uses: generalized tonic–clonic  and partial seizures; trigeminal neuralgia; 
bipolar disorders (section 24.2.2). 

Contraindications: atrioventricular conduction abnormalities; history of bone 
marrow depression; porphyria. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
cardiac disease (see also Contraindications); skin reactions (see Adverse 
effects); history of blood disorders (monitor blood counts before and 
during treatment); glaucoma; pregnancy (important see note above; 
Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (see note above; Appendix 3); avoid sudden 
withdrawal (see note above); interactions: Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 71 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

BLOOD, HEPATIC, OR SKIN DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told 
how to recognize signs of blood, liver, or skin disorders, and advised to seek immediate 
medical attention if symptoms such as fever, sore throat, rash, mouth ulcers, bruising, 
or bleeding develop. Leukopenia which is severe, progressive, and associated with 
clinical symptoms requires withdrawal (if necessary under cover of a suitable alternative 
antiepileptic). 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving; see also note above. 
Dose:  
Generalized tonic–clonic seizures, partial seizures, by mouth, ADULT, initially 
100–200 mg 1–2 times daily, increased gradually according to response to 
usual maintenance dose of 0.8–1.2 g daily in divided doses; in some cases, 
up to 1.6–2 g daily may be needed (in the ELDERLY, reduce the initial dose); 
CHILD 12–18 years, initially 100–200 mg 1–2 times daily, increased gradually 
to usual maintenance dose of 400–600 mg 2–3 times daily; CHILD 1 month–
12 years, initially 5 mg/kg at night or 2.5 mg/kg twice daily, increased by 
2.5–5 mg/kg every 3–7 days if necessary; usual maintenance dose of 
5 mg/kg 2–3 times daily; in some cases, up to 20 mg/kg daily may be 
needed. 

Trigeminal neuralgia, by mouth, ADULT, initially 100 mg 1–2 times daily, 
increased gradually according to response; usual dose, 200 mg 3–4 times 
daily (up to 1.6 g daily may be needed in some patients). 

NOTE. Plasma concentration for optimum response, 4–12 mg/litre  
(17–50 micromol/litre). 

Adverse effects: dizziness, drowsiness, headache, ataxia, blurred vision, 
diplopia (may be associated with high plasma levels); gastrointestinal 
intolerance including nausea and vomiting, anorexia, abdominal pain, dry 
mouth, diarrhoea or constipation; commonly, mild transient generalized 
erythematous rash (withdraw if rash worsens or is accompanied by other 
symptoms); leukopenia and other blood disorders (including 
thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and aplastic anaemia); cholestatic 
jaundice, hepatitis, acute renal failure, Stevens-Johnson syndrome (erythema 
multiforme), toxic epidermal necrolysis, alopecia, thromboembolism, 
arthralgia, fever, proteinuria, lymph node enlargement, arrhythmias, heart 
block and heart failure, dyskinesias, paraesthesia, depression, impotence, 
male infertility, gynaecomastia, galactorrhoea, aggression, activation of 
psychosis, photosensitivity, pulmonary hypersensitivity, hyponatraemia, 
oedema, and disturbances of bone metabolism with osteomalacia also 
reported; confusion and agitation in the elderly.  

 
 

72 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Diazepam 
Injection: 5 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule (intravenous or rectal). 

Drug subject to international control under the Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances (1971). 

Diazepam is a representative benzodiazepine anticonvulsant. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: status epilepticus; emergency management of recurrent seizures; 
recurrent or prolonged febrile convulsions; seizures associated with 
poisoning and drug withdrawal; adjunct in acute alcohol withdrawal; 
premedication (section 1.3); anxiety disorders (section 24.3). 

Contraindications: respiratory depression; acute pulmonary insufficiency; sleep 
apnoea; severe hepatic impairment; myasthenia gravis; in neonates avoid 
injections containing benzyl alcohol. 

Precautions: respiratory disease; muscle weakness, history of alcohol or drug 
abuse, marked personality disorder; pregnancy (see note above; Appendix 2) 
and breastfeeding (see note above; Appendix 3); reduce dose in the elderly 
or debilitated patients and in hepatic impairment (avoid if severe; 
Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); avoid prolonged use and 
abrupt withdrawal; when given intravenously facilities for reversing 
respiratory depression with mechanical ventilation must be at hand (see 
note below); porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

PRECAUTIONS FOR INTRAVENOUS INFUSION. Intravenous infusion of 
diazepam is potentially hazardous (especially if prolonged) calling for close and 
constant observation and is best carried out in a specialist centre with intensive care 
facilities. Prolonged intravenous infusion may lead to accumulation and delay recovery. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving; see also note above. 
Dose: 
Status epilepticus, emergency management of recurrent epileptic seizures,  
by slow intravenous injection (at a rate of 5 mg/minute), ADULT, 10–20 mg, 
repeated if necessary after 30–60 minutes; may be followed by intravenous 
infusion up to a maximum of 3 mg/kg over 24 hours; CHILD, 200– 
300 micrograms/kg (or 1 mg per year of age);  
by rectum as solution, ADULT and CHILD over 10 kg, 500 micrograms/kg; 
ELDERLY, 250 micrograms/kg; repeated if necessary every 12 hours; if 
convulsions not controlled, other measures should be instituted. 

Febrile convulsions (preferred treatment), by rectum (as a solution) [injection 
solution may be used], CHILD over 10 kg, 500 micrograms/kg (maximum, 
10 mg), with dose repeated if necessary. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 73 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Febrile convulsions (alternative treatment), by slow intravenous injection, CHILD, 
200–300 micrograms/kg (or 1 mg per year of age).  

Drug or alcohol withdrawal, by slow intravenous injection (at a rate of 
5 mg/minute), ADULT, 10 mg; higher doses may be required depending on 
severity of symptoms. 

Seizures associated with poisoning, by slow intravenous injection (at a rate of 
5 mg/minute), ADULT, 10–20 mg. 

Adverse effects: drowsiness and lightheadedness the next day; confusion and 
ataxia (especially in the elderly); amnesia; dependence; paradoxical increase 
in aggression; muscle weakness; occasionally headache, vertigo, salivation 
changes, gastrointestinal disturbances, skin reactions, visual disturbances, 
dysarthria, tremor, changes in libido, incontinence, and urinary retention; 
blood disorders and jaundice; hypotension and apnoea, pain and 
thrombophlebitis (with injection). 

Ethosuximide 
Capsule: 250 mg.  
Oral liquid: 250 mg/5 ml. 

Ethosuximide is a complementary antiepileptic medicine. 

Uses: absence seizures. 
Precautions: hepatic or renal impairment (blood counts and hepatic and renal 
function tests recommended); pregnancy (see note above; Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (see note above; Appendix 3); avoid sudden withdrawal (see 
note above); porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

BLOOD DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs 
of blood disorders, and advised to seek immediate medical attention if symptoms such 
as fever, sore throat, mouth ulcers, bruising or bleeding develop. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving; see also note above. 
Dose:  
Absence seizures, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 6 years, initially 500 mg 
daily, increased by 250 mg at intervals of 4–7 days to a usual maintenance 
dose of 1–1.5 g daily (in some cases, up to 2 g daily may be needed); CHILD 
under 6 years, initially 250 mg daily, increased gradually to usual 
maintenance dose of 20 mg/kg daily. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Daily doses of 1 g and above should be taken as 2 or more 
divided doses. 

NOTE. Plasma concentration for optimum response, 40–100 mg/litre  
(300–700 micromol/litre). 

74 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances including anorexia, hiccups, 
nausea and vomiting, and epigastric pain (particularly during initial 
treatment); weight loss, drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, headache, depression, 
mild euphoria; rarely rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (erythema 
multiforme), systemic lupus erythematosus, disturbances of liver and renal 
function (see Precautions), and haematological disorders (including 
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, thrombocytopenia, 
pancytopenia); gum hyperplasia, swelling of tongue, irritability, hyperactivity, 
sleep disturbances, night terrors, aggressiveness, psychosis, increased libido, 
myopia, and vaginal bleeding also reported. 

Magnesium sulfate 
Injection: 500 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule; 500 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

Uses: prevention of recurrent seizures in eclampsia; prevention of seizures in 
pre-eclampsia. 

Precautions: see note above; myasthenia gravis; hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Prevention of recurrent seizures in eclampsia, by intravenous injection, ADULT and 

ADOLESCENT, initially 4 g over 5–15 minutes followed either by intravenous 
infusion, 1 g/hour for at least 24 hours after the last seizure or delivery 
(whichever occurs later) or by deep intramuscular injection, 5 g into each buttock, 
then 5 g every 4 hours into alternate buttocks for at least 24 hours after the 
last seizure or delivery (whichever occurs later); recurrence of seizures may 
require an additional intravenous injection of 2 g (4 g if body weight over 
70 kg). 

Prevention of seizures in pre-eclampsia, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and 
ADOLESCENT, initially 4 g over 5–15 minutes followed either by intravenous 
infusion, 1 g/hour for 24 hours or by deep intramuscular injection, 5 g into each 
buttock, then 5 g every 4 hours into alternate buttocks for 24 hours; if 
seizure occurs, give an additional dose by intravenous injection of 2 g. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. For 
intravenous injection, the concentration of magnesium sulfate should not exceed 20% 
(dilute 1 part of magnesium sulfate injection, 50%, with at least 1.5 parts of water for 
injection); for intramuscular injection, mix magnesium sulfate injection, 50%, with 1 ml 
lidocaine injection, 2%. 

Adverse effects: generally those associated with hypermagnesaemia (see also 
notes above), including nausea, vomiting, thirst, flushing of skin, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 75 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

hypotension, arrhythmias, coma, respiratory depression, drowsiness, 
confusion, loss of tendon reflexes, and muscle weakness. 

Phenobarbital 
Injection: 200 mg/ml (phenobarbital sodium).  
Oral liquid: 15 mg/5 ml (phenobarbital) or 5 ml (phenobarbital sodium).  
Tablet: 15–100 mg (phenobarbital). 

Drug subject to international control under the Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances (1971). 

Uses: generalized tonic–clonic  seizures; partial seizures; neonatal seizures; 
febrile convulsions; status epilepticus (see note above). 

Contraindications: porphyria; absence seizures. 
Precautions: the elderly, debilitated, children (may cause behavioural changes); 
impaired renal function (Appendix 4); impaired hepatic function 
(Appendix 5), respiratory depression (avoid if severe); pregnancy (see note 
above; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (see note above; Appendix 3); avoid 
sudden withdrawal (see note above); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving; see also notes above. 
Dose:  
Generalized tonic–clonic  seizures, partial seizures, by mouth, ADULT,  
60–180 mg at night; CHILD, up to 8 mg/kg daily. 

Febrile convulsions, by mouth, CHILD, up to 8 mg/kg daily. 
Neonatal seizures, by intravenous injection (dilute injection 1 in 10 with water for 
injections), NEONATE, 5–10 mg/kg every 20–30 minutes up to plasma 
concentration of 40 mg/litre. 

Status epilepticus, by intravenous injection (dilute injection 1 in 10 with water for 
injection), ADULT, 10 mg/kg at a rate of not more than 100 mg/minute (up 
to a maximum total dose of 1 g); CHILD, 5–10 mg/kg at a rate of not more 
than 30 mg/minute. 

NOTE. For therapeutic purposes phenobarbital and phenobarbital sodium may be 
considered equivalent in effect. Plasma concentration for optimum response,  
15–40 mg/litre (65–170 micromol/litre). 

Adverse effects: sedation, mental depression, ataxia, nystagmus; allergic skin 
reactions including rarely, exfoliative dermatitis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
and Stevens-Johnson syndrome (erythema multiforme); paradoxical 
excitement, restlessness and confusion in the elderly; irritability and 
hyperactivity in children; megaloblastic anaemia (may be treated with folic 
acid); osteomalacia; status epilepticus (on treatment withdrawal); 
hypotension, shock, laryngospasm and apnoea (with intravenous injection). 

76 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

Phenytoin 
Capsule: 25 mg; 50 mg; 100 mg (sodium salt).  
Injection: 50 mg/ml in 5-ml vial (sodium salt).  
Oral liquid: 25–30 mg/5 ml.  
Tablet: 25 mg; 50 mg; 100 mg (sodium salt).  
Tablet (chewable): 50 mg. 

NOTE. The presence of both the 25 mg/5 ml and the 30 mg/5 ml strengths of the 
oral liquid on the same market should be avoided to prevent confusion in prescribing 
and dispensing. 

Uses: generalized tonic–clonic seizures; partial seizures; status epilepticus. 
Contraindications: porphyria; avoid parenteral use in sinus bradycardia, sino-
atrial block, second- and third-degree heart block, Stokes-Adams syndrome. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 5); pregnancy 
(increased risk of birth defects and neonatal bleeding, see note above; 
Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (see note above; Appendix 3); diabetes 
mellitus; monitor blood counts; hypotension and heart failure (especially 
with parenteral use); in case of intravenous administration, resuscitation 
facilities must be available and the injection solution alkaline (irritant to 
tissues); interactions: Appendix 1. 

BLOOD OR SKIN DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to 
recognize signs of blood or skin disorders and advised to seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms such as sore throat, rash, mouth ulcers, bruising, or bleeding 
develop. Leukopenia which is severe, progressive or associated with clinical symptoms 
requires withdrawal (if necessary under cover of a suitable alternative antiepileptic). 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving; see also note above. 
Dose:  
Generalized tonic–clonic  seizures, partial seizures, by mouth, ADULT, initially  
3–4 mg/kg daily (as a single dose or in 2 divided doses), increased gradually 
at intervals of 2 weeks as necessary (with plasma phenytoin concentration 
monitoring); to a usual maintenance dose of 200–500 mg daily; CHILD, 
initially 3–5 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses, increased gradually according to 
clinical response and plasma phenytoin concentration, to a usual 
maintenance dose of 4–8 mg/kg daily (maximum, 300 mg daily). 

NOTE. Plasma concentration for optimum response 10–20 mg/litre  
(40–80 micromol/litre). 

PATIENT ADVICE. Preferably taken with or after food. 

Status epilepticus,  
by slow intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion (with blood pressure and 
ECG monitoring), ADULT, 15 mg/kg at a rate of not more than 
50 mg/minute, as a loading dose; maintenance doses of about 100 mg;  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 77 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

by mouth or by slow intravenous injection should be given thereafter at intervals 
of 6–8 hours, with monitoring of plasma concentrations; rates and dose 
reduced according to weight; CHILD, 15 mg/kg as a loading dose at rate of 
1 mg/kg/minute (not exceeding 50 mg/minute); NEONATE,  
15–20 mg/kg as a loading dose at rate of 1–3 mg/kg/minute. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: gastric intolerance, headache, sleeplessness, agitation (during 
initial phase); sedation, confusion, blurred vision, ataxia, nystagmus, 
diplopia, slurred speech, cerebellar-vestibular symptoms, behavioural 
disorders, hallucinations, hyperglycaemia (may be signs of overdosage); 
gingival hyperplasia, acne, coarse facies, hirsutism, fever, hepatitis, 
neurological changes including peripheral neuropathy, choreiform 
movements, impaired cognition, and increased seizure frequency; 
osteomalacia, rickets (associated with reduced plasma calcium levels); 
lymph-node enlargement; vertigo; rash (discontinue; if mild re-introduce 
cautiously, but discontinue if recurrence); very rarely Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (erythema multiforme), systemic lupus erythematosus, and toxic 
epidermal necrolysis; rarely blood disorders including megaloblastic anaemia 
(may be treated with folic acid), leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and 
agranulocytosis with or without bone marrow depression; with intravenous 
administration, cardiovascular and central nervous system depression 
(particularly if administered too rapidly) with arrhythmias, hypotension and 
cardiovascular collapse, and alterations in respiratory function (including 
respiratory collapse). 

Valproic acid 
Oral liquid: 200 mg/5 ml. 
Tablet (crushable): 100 mg. 
Tablet (enteric-coated): 200 mg; 500 mg (sodium valproate). 

Uses: all forms of epilepsy; acute mania (section 24.2.2). 
Contraindications: active liver disease, family history of severe hepatic 
dysfunction; pancreatitis; porphyria. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (monitor liver function before and during 
first 6 months of therapy), especially in patients most at risk (including 
children under 3 years of age and those with metabolic disorders, 
degenerative disorders, organic brain disease or severe seizure disorders 
associated with mental retardation or multiple antiepileptic therapy; 
Appendix 5); ensure no undue potential for bleeding before starting, and 
also before major surgery or anticoagulant therapy; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); pregnancy (increased risk of birth defects and neonatal 

78 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



5. Anticonvulsants/antiepileptics 

bleeding, see note above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see note above; 
Appendix 3); systemic lupus erythematosus; false-positive urine tests for 
ketones; avoid sudden withdrawal (see note above); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

BLOOD OR HEPATIC DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to 
recognize signs of blood or liver disorders, and advised to seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms including loss of seizure control, malaise, weakness, anorexia, 
lethargy, oedema, vomiting, abdominal pain, drowsiness, jaundice, or spontaneous 
bruising or bleeding develop. 

PANCREATITIS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs of 
pancreatitis and advised to seek immediate medical attention if symptoms such as 
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting develop; discontinue if pancreatitis diagnosed. 
Dose:  
All forms of epilepsy, by mouth, ADULT, and CHILD over 12 years, initially 
600 mg daily in 2 divided doses, preferably after food, increased by 200 mg 
daily at 3-day intervals to a maximum of 2.5 g daily in divided doses; usual 
maintenance dose of 1–2 g daily (20–30 mg/kg daily); CHILD up to 20 kg, 
initially 20 mg/kg daily in divided doses, may be increased provided plasma 
concentrations monitored (above 40 mg/kg daily also monitor clinical 
chemistry and haematological parameters); CHILD under 12 years, over 
20 kg, initially 400 mg daily in divided doses, increased until control (usually 
in range of 20–30 mg/kg daily); maximum, 35 mg/kg daily. 

NOTE. Plasma concentrations in therapeutic range of 40–100 mg/litre  
(280–700 micromol/litre); not generally considered useful in assessing control, but 
higher levels associated with increased incidence of adverse effects; indicator of 
compliance, dose change or co-medication. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal irritation, nausea, increased appetite, and 
weight gain, hyperammonaemia; ataxia, tremor; transient hair loss (regrowth 
may be curly); oedema, thrombocytopenia, inhibition of platelet aggregation; 
impaired hepatic function and rarely fatal hepatic failure (withdraw 
treatment immediately if malaise, weakness, lethargy, oedema, abdominal 
pain, vomiting, anorexia, jaundice, drowsiness, or loss of seizure control; see 
also note in Precautions); sedation reported and also increased alertness; 
behavioural disturbances; rarely pancreatitis (measure plasma amylase if 
acute abdominal pain; see also note in Precautions), extrapyramidal 
symptoms, blood disorders (leukopenia, pancytopenia, red cell hypoplasia, 
and fibrinogen reduction; see also note in Precautions); irregular periods, 
amenorrhoea, gynaecomastia, hearing loss, Fanconi syndrome, dementia, 
toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome (erythema 
multiforme), vasculitis, hirsutism, and acne reported. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 79 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

SECTION 6:  
Anti-infective medicines 

6.1 Anthelminthics 81 
6.1.1 Intestinal anthelminthics 81 
6.1.2 Antifilarials 89 
6.1.3 Antischistosomals and antitrematode medicine 94 
6.2 Antibacterials 96 
6.2.1 Beta Lactam medicines 98 
6.2.2 Other antibacterials 113 
6.2.3 Antileprosy medicines 130 
6.2.4 Antituberculosis medicines 134 
6.3 Antifungal medicines 144 
6.4 Antiviral medicines 151 
6.4.1 Antiherpes medicines 151 
6.4.2 Antiretrovirals 154 
 Fixed-dose combinations 160 

6.4.2.1 Nucleoside/Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors 162 
6.4.2.2 Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 169 
6.4.2.3 Protease inhibitors 172 

6.4.3 Other antivirals 176 
6.5 Antiprotozoal medicines 178 
6.5.1 Antiamoebic and antigiardiasis medicines 178 
6.5.2 Antileishmaniasis medicines 180 
6.5.3 Antimalarial medicines 186 

6.5.3.1 For curative treatment 187 
6.5.3.2 For prophylaxis 199 

6.5.4 Antipneumocystosis and antitoxoplasmosis medicines 204 
6.5.5 Antitrypanosomal medicines 207 

6.5.5.1 African trypanosomiasis 207 
6.5.5.2 American trypanosomiasis 211 

80 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

6.1 Anthelminthics  

6.1.1 Intestinal anthelminthics 

Cestode infections  
Cestode infections (tapeworms) include intestinal taeniasis and cysticercosis, 
hymenolepiasis (dwarf tapeworm), diphyllobothriasis, and echinococcosis 
(hydatid disease). Cysticercosis is a systemic infection caused by the larval form 
(cysticercus) of Taenia solium.  
Neurocysticercosis occurs when the infection involves the brain. In man, 
echinococcosis is due to the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus or 
E. multilocularis. The larvae (oncospheres) develop by expansion (cystic 
echinococcosis) or, by tumour-like infiltration (alveolar echinococcosis) in the 
liver, lungs, or other organs.  

Diphyllobothriasis 

In diphyllobothriasis, niclosamide or praziquantel in a single dose is highly 
effective. Hydroxocobalamin and folic acid supplements may also be required. 

Echinococcosis 

In echinococcosis, surgery (or, if this is not possible, a technique such as 
“puncture–aspiration–injection–reaspiration”) is the treatment of choice for 
operable cystic disease due to E. granulosus but chemotherapy with 
benzimidazoles, such as albendazole and mebendazole, may be of value as 
adjunctive therapy. Alveolar echinococcosis due to E. multilocularis requires 
both surgery and long-term treatment with either mebendazole or albendazole 
to inhibit spread of the infection. 

Hymenolepiasis 

In hymenolepiasis, praziquantel tends to be more effective than niclosamide, 
although resistance to praziquantel has been reported. Repeated treatment may 
be necessary to cure intense infections or to eliminate the parasite within a 
family group or institution. 

Taeniasis 

In taeniasis, praziquantel is well tolerated and extensively absorbed and kills 
adult intestinal taenia worms in a single dose. Praziquantel also kills T. solium 
cysticerci when taken for 14 days in high doses and it can therefore be used to 
treat neurocysticercosis. However, because dying and disintegrating cysts may 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 81 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

induce localized cerebral oedema, treatment with praziquantel must always be 
undertaken in a hospital setting. In addition, a corticosteroid is usually given to 
reduce the inflammatory response. Albendazole also kills neurocysticerci when 
given daily for one month; a corticosteroid or an antihistamine is also given to 
reduce any inflammatory reaction. Surgery may be the preferred treatment for 
neurocysticerosis in some cases. The longer-established niclosamide acts only 
against the adult intestinal worms.  
Cestode infections due to T. solium occurring during pregnancy should always 
be treated immediately (with praziquantel or niclosamide, but not with 
albendazole) because of the risk of cysticercosis. 

Intestinal nematode infections  
Intestinal nematode infections include ascariasis, capillariasis, enterobiasis, 
hookworm infection, strongyloidiasis, trichostrongyliasis, and trichuriasis.  

Ascariasis  

Ascariasis is an infection, usually of the small intestine, caused by Ascaris 
lumbricoides (roundworm). Single doses of levamisole or pyrantel are effective; 
the broad-spectrum anthelminthics, albendazole or mebendazole, are also 
effective. 

Capillariasis 

Capillariasis is caused by infection of the intestine with Capillaria philippinensis. 
Prolonged treatment with albendazole or mebendazole offers the only 
prospect of cure. 

Enterobiasis  

Enterobiasis is an infection of the large intestine caused by Enterobius 
vermicularis (pinworm, threadworm). All household members should be treated 
concurrently with a single dose of albendazole, mebendazole, or pyrantel. 
Since reinfection readily occurs, at least one further dose should be given  
2–4 weeks later. Piperazine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] is also 
effective but must be taken regularly for at least 7 consecutive days. 

Hookworm infections  

Hookworm infections are caused by Ancylostoma duodenale (ancylostomiasis) and 
Necator americanus (necatoriasis); they are a major cause of iron-deficiency 
anaemia in the tropics and sub-tropics. Ideally all cases of hookworm infection 
should be treated. However, when this is impracticable, priority should be 
given to women in the second- and third-trimester of pregnancy, children, and 
debilitated patients. In hookworm, broad-spectrum anthelminthics are 

82 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

preferred, especially wherever other nematode infections are endemic. Both 
albendazole and mebendazole are effective. 
In animal studies, albendazole and mebendazole have been found to be 
teratogenic. Although there is some evidence to suggest that the use of 
mebendazole in pregnancy is not associated with an increased incidence of 
adverse effects on the fetus, neither mebendazole nor albendazole should be 
used during the first trimester of pregnancy to treat nematode infections. Both 
drugs are contraindicated for the treatment of cestode infections in pregnancy 
(see Cestode infections above).  
Levamisole is effective in the treatment of mixed roundworm and hookworm 
infections. Pyrantel has been highly effective against hookworm in some 
community-based control programmes, although several doses are often 
needed to eliminate Necator americanus infection. Patients with iron-deficiency 
anaemia caused by hookworm infection require supplementary iron salts and 
should receive ferrous sulfate (200 mg iron daily for adults) for at least 
3 months after a haemoglobin concentration of 12 g/100 ml is attained (see 
also section 10.1).  

Strongyloidiasis  

Strongyloidiasis is an infection of the small intestine caused by Strongyloides 
stercoralis. All infected patients should be treated. Ivermectin (section 6.1.2) in a 
single dose of 200 micrograms/kg or 200 micrograms/kg/day on 
2 consecutive days is the treatment of choice for chronic strongyloidiasis but it 
may not be available in all countries. Albendazole, 400 mg once or twice daily 
for 3 days, is well tolerated by both adults and children aged over 2 years and 
may eradicate up to 80% of infections. Mebendazole has also been used but, to 
be effective, it must be administered for longer periods as it has a limited effect 
on larvae and hence the prevention of autoinfection. 

Trichostrongyliasis 

Trichostrongyliasis is an infection of the small intestine caused by 
Trichostrongylus spp. In symptomatic trichostrongyliasis, a single dose of 
pyrantel (10 mg/kg) or albendazole (400 mg) is effective. 

Trichuriasis  

Trichuriasis is an infection of the large intestine caused by Trichuris trichiura 
(whipworm). Chemotherapy is required whenever symptoms develop or when 
faecal samples are found to be heavily contaminated (up to 10 000 eggs per 
gram). A single dose of albendazole (400 mg) or mebendazole (500 mg) can 
be effective in mild to moderate infections; heavier infections require a 3-day 
course. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 83 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

In animal studies, albendazole and mebendazole have been found to be 
teratogenic. They are therefore contraindicated for the treatment of cestode 
infections in pregnancy; furthermore, pregnancy should be excluded before 
treatment with albendazole and patients should be advised to use non-
hormonal contraception during, and for 1 month after, treatment).  

Tissue nematode infections  
Tissue nematode infections include angiostrongyliasis, anisakiasis, cutaneous 
larva migrans, dracunculiasis, trichinellosis, and visceral larva migrans.  

Angiostrongyliasis  

Angiostrongyliasis is caused by infection with the larvae of the rat lungworm, 
Parastrongylus cantonensis (Angiostrongylus cantonensis). Symptomatic treatment 
pending spontaneous recovery is often all that is required. 

Anisakiasis  

Anisakiasis is caused by infection with seafood containing larvae of Anisakis, 
Contracaecum, or Pseudoterranova spp. In anisakiasis, anthelminthic treatment is 
rarely necessary. Prevention is dependent upon informing communities of the 
hazards of eating raw or inadequately prepared saltwater fish; early evisceration 
of fish after capture, and freezing of seafood at -20°C for at least 60 hours 
before sale. 

Cutaneous larva migrans 

Cutaneous larva migrans (creeping eruption) is caused by infection with larvae 
of animal hookworms, usually Ancylostoma braziliense and A. caninum which 
infect cats and dogs. Albendazole in a single dose of 400 mg is effective. 

Dracunculiasis  

Dracunculiasis (dracontiasis, guinea-worm infection) is caused by infection 
with Dracunculus medinensis, acquired through drinking water containing larvae 
that develop in small freshwater crustaceans.  Metronidazole (section 6.5.1) 
(25 mg/kg daily for 10 days, up to a daily maximum of 750 mg for children) 
provides rapid symptomatic relief. It also weakens the anchorage of the worms 
in the subcutaneous tissues, and they can then be removed by traction. 
However, since it has no effect on the larvae of pre-emergent worms, it does 
not immediately prevent transmission. 

Trichinellosis 

Trichinellosis (trichinosis) is caused by infection with the larvae of Trichinella 
spiralis. Each case of confirmed or even suspected trichinellosis infection 
should be treated in order to prevent the continued production of larvae. In 

84 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

both adults and children, mebendazole (200 mg daily for 5 days), albendazole 
(400 mg daily for 3 days), and pyrantel (10 mg/kg daily for 5 days) are all 
effective. Prednisolone (40–60 mg daily) may be needed to alleviate the allergic 
and inflammatory symptoms (see also section 3). 

Visceral larva migrans  

Visceral larva migrans (toxocariasis) is caused by infection with the larval 
forms of Toxocara canis and less commonly, T. cati (which infect dogs and cats). 
Treatment should be reserved for symptomatic infections. A 3-week oral 
course of diethylcarbamazine (section 6.1.2) kills the larvae and arrests the 
disease, but established lesions are irreversible. To reduce the intensity of 
allergic reactions induced by dying larvae, dosage is commonly commenced at 
1 mg/kg twice daily and raised progressively to 3 mg/kg twice daily (adults and 
children). 
Ocular larva migrans occurs when larvae invade the eye, causing a granuloma 
which may result in blindness. In order to suppress allergic inflammatory 
responses in patients with ophthalmic lesions, prednisolone should be 
administered concurrently, either topically or systemically. 

Albendazole 
Tablet (chewable): 400 mg. 

Uses: Echinococcus multilocularis and E. granulosus infections prior to surgery or 
not amenable to surgery; neurocysticercosis; nematode infections including 
ascariasis, capillariasis, enterobiasis, hookworm infections, strongyloidiasis, 
trichostrongyliasis, trichuriasis; filariasis (section 6.1.2). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (see introductory note above and Precautions; 
Appendix 2). 

Precautions: liver function tests and blood counts recommended before 
longer-term treatment and twice during each cycle; exclude pregnancy 
before starting treatment (advise patients to use non-hormonal 
contraception during and for 1 month after treatment); breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Cystic echinococcosis, by mouth, ADULT over 60 kg, 800 mg daily in 2 divided 
doses for 28 days followed by 14 tablet-free days; ADULT less than 60 kg, 
15 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses (maximum daily dose, 800 mg) for 
28 days followed by 14 tablet-free days; up to 3 courses may be given. 

Alveolar echinococcosis, by mouth, ADULT, as for cystic echinococcosis, but 
treatment cycles may need to be continued for months or years.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 85 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Neurocysticercosis, by mouth, ADULT over 60 kg, 800 mg daily in 2 divided 
doses for 8–30 days; ADULT less than 60 kg, 15 mg/kg daily in 2 divided 
doses (maximum daily dose, 800 mg) for 8–30 days. 

Ascariasis, hookworm infections, enterobiasis, and trichostrongyliasis, by 
mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 400 mg as a single dose; CHILD 12 
months–2 years, 200 mg as a single dose. 

Trichuriasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 400 mg as a single 
dose (for moderate infections) or 400 mg daily for 3 days (severe infections); 
CHILD 12 months–2 years, 200 mg as a single dose (for moderate infections) 
or 200 mg initially then 100 mg twice daily for 3 days (severe infections). 

Strongyloidiasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 400 mg once or 
twice daily for 3 days. 

Capillariasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 400 mg daily for 10 
days. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, dizziness; increases in 
liver enzymes; reversible alopecia; rash; fever; leukopenia and rarely, 
pancytopenia; allergic shock if cyst leakage; convulsions and meningism in 
cerebral disease. 

Levamisole 
Tablet: 50 mg; 150 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Uses: ascariasis, hookworm infections, and mixed ascariasis with hookworm 
infections. 

Contraindications: breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 
Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  

Ascariasis, hookworm infections, and mixed ascariasis with hookworm 
infections, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 2.5 mg/kg as a single dose; in severe 
hookworm infection, a second dose may be given after 7 days. 

Adverse effects: abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, headache. 

Mebendazole 
Tablet (chewable): 100 mg; 500 mg. 

Mebendazole is a representative benzimidazole carbamate derivative anthelminthic. 
Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

86 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Uses: Echinococcus granulosus and E. multilocularis infections prior to surgery or not 
amenable to surgery; nematode infections including ascariasis, capillariasis, enterobiasis, 
hookworm infections, and trichuriasis. 

Contraindications: pregnancy (see also introductory note above; Appendix 2). 
Precautions: blood counts and liver function tests recommended with high-
dose regimens; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Cystic echinococcosis, alveolar echinococcosis, by mouth, ADULT, 4.5 g daily in 
3 divided doses for 6 months; in alveolar echinococcosis, treatment may be 
required for up to 2 years after radical surgery, or indefinitely in inoperable 
cases. 

Ascariasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 1 year, 500 mg as a single dose 
or 100 mg twice daily for 3 days. 

Hookworm infections, trichuriasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 1 year, 
100 mg twice daily for 3 days; if eggs persist in the faeces, second course 
after 3–4 weeks; alternatively (especially for mass treatment control 
programmes), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 1 year, 500 mg as a single 
dose. 

Enterobiasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 100 mg as a single 
dose, repeated after interval of 2–3 weeks; all household members over 
2 years should be treated at the same time. 

Capillariasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 200 mg daily for 20–
30 days; for mass treatment control programmes, by mouth, ADULT and 
CHILD over 2 years, 500 mg as a single dose 4 times a year. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Doses should be taken between meals. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, dizziness; with high 
doses, allergic reactions, raised liver enzymes, alopecia, and bone marrow 
depression. 

Niclosamide 
Tablet (chewable): 500 mg. 

Uses: cestode (Taenia saginata, T. solium, Hymenolepis nana, and Diphyllobothrium 
latum) infections. 

Precautions: chronic constipation (restore regular bowel movement before 
treatment); give antiemetic before treatment; not effective against larval 
worms; pregnancy (Appendix 2). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 87 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
T. solium infection, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 6 years, 2 g as a single dose 
after a light breakfast, followed after 2 hours by a laxative; CHILD under 
2 years, 500 mg, 2–6 years, 1 g. 

T. saginata and Diphyllobothrium latum infections, by mouth, as for T. solium but 
half the dose may be taken after breakfast and the remainder 1 hour later 
followed by a laxative after 2 hours. 

Hymenolepis nana infection, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 6 years, 2 g as a 
single dose on the first day then 1 g daily for 6 days; CHILD under 2 years, 
500 mg on the first day then 250 mg daily for 6 days; CHILD 2–6 years, 1 g 
on the first day then 500 mg daily for 6 days. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Tablets should be chewed thoroughly (or crushed) before 
washing down with water. 

Adverse effects: nausea, retching, abdominal pain; lightheadedness; pruritus. 

Praziquantel 
Tablet: 150 mg; 600 mg. 

Uses: cestode (Taenia saginata, T. solium, Hymenolepis nana and Diphyllobothrium 
latum) infections; schistosomiasis and other trematode infections 
(section 6.1.3). 

Contraindications: ocular cysticercosis. 
Precautions: neurocysticercosis (requires corticosteroid cover with monitoring 
in a hospital setting); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (avoid 
during, and for 72 hours, after treatment, Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Taenia saginata and T. solium infections, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 
5–10 mg/kg as a single dose. 

Hymenolepis nana infection, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years,  
15–25 mg/kg as a single dose. 

Diphyllobothrium latum infection, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years,  
10–25 mg/kg as a single dose. 

Cysticercosis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 50 mg/kg daily in 
3 divided doses for 14 days with prednisolone (or similar corticosteroid) 
given 2–3 days before and throughout treatment period. 

88 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dermal cysticercosis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 60 mg/kg daily 
in 3 divided doses for 6 days. 

Adverse effects: abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, malaise; 
headache, dizziness, drowsiness; rarely hypersensitivity reactions including 
fever, urticaria, pruritus, and eosinophilia (may be due to dead and dying 
parasites); in neurocysticercosis, headache, hyperthermia, seizures, and 
intracranial hypertension (inflammatory response to dead and dying 
parasites in the central nervous system). 

Pyrantel 
Oral liquid: 50 mg (as embonate)/ml.  
Tablet (chewable): 250 mg (as embonate). 

Uses: nematode infections, including ascariasis, hookworm infections, 
enterobiasis, trichostrongyliasis and trichinellosis. 

Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); liver disease 
(reduce dose). 

Dose:  
Ascariasis, trichostrongyliasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 10 mg/kg as a 
single dose. 

Hookworm infections, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 10 mg/kg as a single dose; 
in severe infections, 10 mg/kg daily for 4 days. 

Enterobiasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 10 mg/kg as a single dose with a 
second dose after 2–4 weeks. 

Adverse effects: mild gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, dizziness, 
drowsiness, insomnia, rash, and elevated liver enzymes. 

6.1.2 Antifilarials 

Loiasis  
Loiasis is an infection with the filarial nematode, Loa loa, and is transmitted by 
the biting tabanid fly, Chrysops. Diethylcarbamazine is effective against both 
adult worms and larvae; a single weekly dose is normally effective as 
prophylaxis. During individual treatment, particularly of persons with heavy 
microfilaraemia (>50 000 microfilariae/ml blood), a condition simulating 
meningoencephalitis occasionally occurs. This probably results from sludging 
of moribund microfilariae within cerebral capillaries. The frequency of 
meningoencephalitis associated with diethylcarbamazine therapy of loiasis is 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 89 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

reported to be 1.25%, with a mortality rate of about 50% in affected patients; 
treatment with diethylcarbamazine should be stopped at the first sign of 
cerebral involvement (and specialist advice sought). Permanent cerebral 
damage is common among patients who survive and this possibility should be 
considered when deciding on treatment. Treatment of heavily infected patients 
should thus begin at low dosages and corticosteroid and antihistamine cover 
should be provided for the first 2–3 days.  

Lymphatic filariasis  
Lymphatic filariasis is caused by infection with Wuchereria bancrofti (bancroftian 
filariasis), Brugia malayi, or B. timori (brugian filariasis). Occult filariasis (tropical 
pulmonary eosinophilia) is a clinical variant of W. bancrofti infection. Individual 
treatment with diethylcarbamazine, which has both microfilaricidal and 
macrofilaricidal activity, is effective. Total cumulative dosages of 72 mg/kg are 
generally recommended for W. bancrofti infections; half this dose is usually 
effective in B.malayi and B. timori infections. In all cases, treatment is best 
initiated with smaller doses for 2–3 days to avoid the danger of immunological 
reactions. Rigorous hygiene to the affected limbs with adjunctive measures to 
minimize infection and promote lymph flow are important for reducing acute 
episodes of inflammation.  
In communities where filariasis is endemic, annual administration of single 
doses of albendazole (400 mg) with either diethylcarbamazine (6 mg/kg) or 
ivermectin (200 micrograms/kg) is effective for interrupting transmission; this 
treatment should be continued for at least 5 years. Trials in India and China 
have shown that the consistent use over a period of 6–12 months of table salt 
containing diethylcarbamazine, 0.1%, can eliminate W. bancrofti; a 
concentration of 0.3% for 3–4 months may be required where B. malayi is 
endemic. 

Onchocerciasis  
Onchocerciasis (river blindness) is caused by infection with the filarial 
nematode, Onchocerca volvulus. The vector is the blackfly which breeds near fast-
flowing rivers. Ivermectin has transformed suppressive treatment of 
onchocerciasis and is now used extensively in control programmes in many 
countries. It rapidly eliminates microfilariae from the skin and more gradually 
from the eye. Its microfilaricidal action is more persistent than that of 
diethylcarbamazine; it is also less liable to provoke adverse reactions. A single 
oral dose of ivermectin reduces the microfilarial count to low levels for up to a 
year. It appears both to kill microfilariae and to inhibit their expulsion from 
the uterus of female worms. A single annual dose may suppress 
microfilaraemia to a degree that prevents development of clinical disease. 
Although the drug is generally well tolerated, it is advisable to provide medical 

90 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

support as part of treatment programmes. Patients with a heavy microfilarial 
load occasionally react adversely; very rarely, transient severe postural 
hypotension has occurred within 12–24 hours of treatment.  
Treatment of pregnant women with ivermectin should be limited to those 
situations where the risk of complications from untreated onchocerciasis 
exceeds the potential risk to the fetus from treatment. Mass treatment 
programmes should not include children under 15 kg, pregnant patients or 
those with severe illness.  
Diethylcarbamazine has been now largely superseded by ivermectin as a 
microfilaricide in onchocerciasis because of the frequency with which it 
induces severe host (Mazzotti) reactions which are characterized by itching, 
rash, oedema, pain and swelling of the lymph nodes, fever, and severe eye 
lesions.  
Suramin sodium is the only macrofilaricide that is currently available for use 
against Onchocerca volvulus. Administered intravenously over a period of several 
weeks suramin also kills microfilariae. It is, however, one of the most toxic 
substances used in clinical medicine and should always be given under medical 
supervision in a hospital. A careful assessment must always be made of the 
patient’s capacity to withstand the effects of suramin treatment both before 
and during administration. 

Diethylcarbamazine 
Tablet: 50 mg; 100 mg (dihydrogen citrate). 

Diethylcarbamazine is a complementary antifilarial medicine.  

Uses: systemic lymphatic filariasis and occult filariasis; loiasis; tissue nematode 
infections, in particular, visceral larva migrans (section 6.1.1). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (delay treatment until after delivery, Appendix 2). 
Precautions: renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4); cardiac disorders; 
other severe acute disease (delay diethylcarbamazine treatment until after 
recovery). 

Dose:  
Lymphatic filariasis (bancroftian), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, 
1 mg/kg as a single dose on the first day, increased gradually over 3 days to 
6 mg/kg daily, preferably in divided doses after meals, for 12 days; CHILD 
under 10 years, half the adult dose; mass treatment control programmes, 
ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, 6 mg/kg in divided doses over 24 hours, 
once a year; child under 10 years, half the adult dose. 

Lymphatic filariasis (brugian), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, 
1 mg/kg as a single dose on the first day, increased gradually over 3 days to 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 91 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

3–6 mg/kg daily, preferably in divided doses after meals, for 6–12 days; 
CHILD under 10 years, half the adult dose; mass treatment control 
programmes, ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, 3–6 mg/kg in divided doses 
over 24 hours, 6 times at weekly or monthly intervals; CHILD under 10 years, 
half the adult dose. 

Occult filariasis, by mouth, ADULT, 8 mg/kg daily for 14 days, repeated as 
necessary if symptoms return. 

NOTE. The above dose regimens are intended only as a guide, since many countries 
have developed specific treatment regimens. 

Loiasis, treatment, by mouth, ADULT, 1 mg/kg as a single dose on the first day, 
doubled on two successive days, then adjusted to 2–3 mg/kg 3 times daily 
for a further 18 days 

Loiasis, prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 300 mg weekly for as long as exposure 
occurs 

PATIENT ADVICE. Complete the prescribed course as directed to minimize allergic 
reactions to dying parasites. 

Adverse effects: headache, dizziness, drowsiness, nausea and vomiting; 
immunological reactions within a few hours of the first dose, subsiding by 
fifth day of treatment, including fever, headache, joint pain, dizziness, 
anorexia, malaise, transient haematuria, urticaria, vomiting, and asthma in 
asthmatics (similar to the Mazzotti reaction) induced by disintegrating 
microfilariae; nodules formed by recently killed worms (palpable 
subcutaneously and along the spermatic cord); transient lymphangitis and 
exacerbation of lymphoedema. 

Ivermectin 
Tablet (scored): 3 mg; 6 mg. 

Uses: suppressive treatment of onchocerciasis; filariasis; strongyloidiasis 
(section 6.1.1); hyperkeratotic scabies (section 13.6). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (delay treatment until after delivery, Appendix 2). 
Precautions: breastfeeding (avoid treating mother until infant is 1 week old, 
Appendix 3). 

Dose:  

Suppression of microfilariae, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 5 years (and 
weighing over 15 kg), 150 micrograms/kg as a single dose once a year 

PATIENT ADVICE. Avoid food or alcohol for at least 2 hours before and after a dose. 

Adverse effects: mild ocular irritation; somnolence; raised liver enzymes; rarely 
postural hypotension; mild Mazzotti reaction within 3 days of treatment, 
resulting from death of microfilariae, including fever, headache, sore throat, 

92 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

cough, pruritus, rash, conjunctivitis, arthralgia, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, 
lymphadenitis, oedema, weakness, tachycardia, nausea and vomiting, and 
diarrhoea. 

Suramin sodium 
Powder for injection: 1 g in vial. 

Suramin sodium is a complementary antifilarial medicine. 

Uses: curative treatment of onchocerciasis; trypanosomiasis (section 6.5.5.1). 
Contraindications: previous anaphylaxis or suramin sensitivity; pregnancy 
(delay treatment until after delivery); severe liver or renal function 
impairment; the elderly or debilitated; total blindness (unless required for 
relief from intensely itchy lesions). 

Precautions: administer only under close medical supervision in hospital and 
with general condition of patient improved as far as possible before 
treatment (see introductory note above); first dose (possible loss of 
consciousness; see under Dose below); maintain satisfactory food and fluid 
intake during treatment; urine tests before and weekly during treatment 
recommended (reduce dose if moderate albuminuria, discontinue 
immediately if severe albuminuria or casts in urine). 

Dose:  

Curative treatment of onchocerciasis, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, initially 
3.3 mg/kg as a single dose (see note below), followed at weekly intervals by 
incremental doses of 6.7 mg/kg, 10.0 mg/kg, 13.3 mg/kg, 16.7 mg/kg, and 
16.7 mg/kg on weeks 2 to 6, respectively (total dose, 66.7 mg/kg over 
6 weeks). 

RECONSTITUTION OF INJECTION. Reconstitute in water for injections to 
produce a final concentration of 10%. 

FIRST (TEST) DOSE. Administer first dose with particular caution; wait at least 
1 minute after injecting the first few microlitres; inject the next 0.5 ml over 30 seconds 
and wait 1 minute; inject the remainder over several minutes. 

Adverse effects: rarely immediate and potentially fatal reaction with nausea, 
vomiting, shock, and loss of consciousness during first dose (see note 
above); albuminuria; abdominal pain; severe diarrhoea; stomal ulceration; 
exfoliative dermatitis; fever; tiredness; anorexia; malaise; polyuria; thirst; 
raised liver enzyme values; paraesthesia and hyperaesthesia of palms and 
soles; swelling, tenderness and abscess formation around adult worms; 
urtico-papular rash, painful hip, hand and foot joints, inflammatory and 
degenerative changes in optic nerve and retina (due to dying microfilariae). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 93 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

 
6.1.3 Antischistosomals and antitrematode medicine 

Fluke infections 
The intestinal flukes include Fasciolopsis buski, Metagonimus yokogawai, Heterophyes 
heterophyes, Echinostoma spp. and Gastrodiscoides hominis. The liver flukes include 
Clonorchis sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, O. felineus and Fasciola hepatica. In some 
areas C. sinensis and Opisthorchis spp. infections are strongly associated with 
cholangiocarcinoma (cancer of the bile ducts). The lung flukes are of the genus 
Paragonimus. 
Praziquantel has transformed the therapy of most fluke infections. 
Parasitological cure has been obtained in virtually all cases (with the exception 
of Fasciola infections) without significant adverse effect but it needs to be taken 
for several days in the treatment of Paragonimus infections. 
Triclabendazole, a benzimidazole compound is highly effective and well 
tolerated, as a single dose or two divided doses, for both Fasciola and 
Paragonimus infections. 

Schistosomiasis 
Schistosomiasis, a waterborne parasitic infection, is caused by several species 
of trematode worms (blood flukes). Its socioeconomic impact as a parasitic 
disease is outstripped only by that of malaria. Intestinal schistosomiasis is 
caused principally by Schistosoma mansoni as well as S. japonicum, S. mekongi, and 
S. intercalatum. Urinary schistosomiasis is caused by S. haematobium. The latter is 
an important predisposing cause of squamous cell cancer of the bladder. 
Praziquantel has transformed the treatment of schistosomiasis and is often 
effective in a single dose, against all species of the parasite. It can be of 
particular value in patients with mixed infections and those who do not 
respond adequately to other drugs. It is also extremely well tolerated and well 
suited for mass treatment control programmes. Extensive use over several 
years has provided no evidence of serious adverse effects or long-term toxicity, 
nor has mutagenic or carcinogenic activity been shown in experimental animals. 
Other drugs still widely used in the treatment of schistosomiasis include 
oxamniquine, which is effective against S. mansoni. Strains resistant to 
oxamniquine, which have been reported in South America, have been 
effectively treated with praziquantel. It is preferable to delay treatment with 
oxamniquine in pregnant women until after delivery unless immediate 
intervention is essential. Due to the lack of information on whether 
oxamniquine is excreted in breast milk, it is preferable not to administer it to 
nursing mothers. 

94 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Oxamniquine 
Capsule: 250 mg.  
Oral liquid: 250 mg/5 ml. 

Oxamniquine is a complementary antischistosomal medicine. 

Uses: intestinal schistosomiasis due to Schistosoma mansoni (acute stage and 
chronic hepatosplenic disease). 

Precautions: epilepsy (close observation required as treatment may precipitate 
seizures); pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3). 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Intestinal schistosomiasis due to S. mansoni (west Africa, South America, 
Caribbean islands), by mouth, ADULT, 15 mg/kg as a single dose; CHILD 
under 30 kg, 20 mg/kg in 2 divided doses. 

Intestinal schistosomiasis due to S. mansoni (east and central Africa, Arabian 
peninsula), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 30 mg/kg in 2 divided doses 

Intestinal schistosomiasis due to S. mansoni (Egypt and southern Africa), 
ADULT and CHILD, 60 mg/kg in divided doses over 2–3 days (maximum, 
single dose 20 mg/kg). 

Adverse effects: commonly, dizziness and drowsiness; headache, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea; intense reddish discoloration of urine; rarely, urticaria, 
hallucinations, and epileptiform convulsions; raised liver enzyme values; 
transient fever, eosinophilia, and scattered pulmonary infiltrates (Loeffler 
syndrome) reported after 3-day course in patients in Egypt and eastern 
Mediterranean. 

Praziquantel 
Tablet: 600 mg. 

Uses: intestinal schistosomiasis; urinary schistosomiasis; intestinal, liver, and 
lung; fluke infections; cestode infections (section 6.1.1). 

Contraindications: ocular cysticercosis (see section 6.1.1). 
Precautions: Paragonimus infections — treatment in hospital as may be central 
nervous system involvement; pregnancy (unless immediate treatment required, 
delay treatment until after delivery; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (avoid during 
and for 72 hours after treatment); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); areas endemic for cysticercosis (possible oedematous reaction); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 95 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  

Intestinal fluke infections, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 
25 mg/kg as a single dose. 

Liver and lung fluke infections, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 
25 mg/kg 3 times daily for 2 consecutive days; alternatively 40 mg/kg as a 
single dose; treatment may need to be extended for several days in 
paragonimiasis. 

Schistosomiasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 40–60 mg/kg as a 
single dose; or in 3 divided doses of 20 mg/kg at intervals of 4–6 hours. 

Adverse effects: abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, malaise, headache, 
dizziness, drowsiness, rectal bleeding; rarely hypersensitivity reactions, 
including fever, pruritus, and eosinophilia (may be due to dead and dying 
parasites). 

Triclabendazole 
Tablet: 250 mg. 

Uses: fascioliasis; paragonimiasis. 
Precautions: Paragonimus infections (treatment in hospital recommended due 
to possible central nervous system involvement); severe fascioliasis (biliary 
colic due to obstruction by dying worms). 

Dose:  
Fascioliasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 10 mg/kg as a single 
dose. 

Paragonimiasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 4 years, 20 mg/kg in 
2 divided doses. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal discomfort; headache. 

6.2 Antibacterials 

Choice of a suitable antibacterial drug  

Choice of an antibacterial drug is based on the identity of the likely pathogen 
and its antibacterial sensitivity, as well as consideration of various factors 
relating to the patient (for example, history of allergy, renal and hepatic 
function, immune status, severity of illness, ethnic origin, and age). 

96 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Antibacterial policy  

Local policies often limit the availability of antibacterials in order to achieve 
reasonable economy consistent with adequate cover, and to reduce the 
development of resistant organisms. A policy may allow a range of drugs for 
general use and permit use of other drugs only on the advice of a 
microbiologist or physician responsible for the control of infectious diseases. 

Before starting therapy 

The following should be considered before starting antimicrobial therapy: 
-  Viral infections should not be treated with antibacterials. However, 

antibacterials are occasionally helpful in controlling secondary bacterial 
infections (for example, acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis secondary to 
herpes simplex infection). 

-   Where possible, samples should be taken for culture and sensitivity testing; 
“blind” antibacterial prescribing for unexplained pyrexia usually leads to 
further difficulty in establishing the diagnosis. 

-    Knowledge of prevalent organisms and their current sensitivity is of great 
help in choosing an antibacterial before bacteriological confirmation is 
available. 

-    The dose of an antibacterial varies according to a number of factors 
including age, weight, hepatic function, renal function, and severity of 
infection. The prescribing of the so-called “standard” dose in serious 
infections may result in failure of treatment; therefore it is important to 
prescribe a dose appropriate to the condition. An inadequate dose may also 
increase the likelihood of antibacterial resistance. On the other hand, for an 
antibacterial with a narrow margin between its toxic and therapeutic dose 
(e.g. an aminoglycoside), it is equally important to avoid an excessive dose. 
In such cases, the concentration of the drug in the plasma may need to be 
monitored. 

-  The route of administration of an antibacterial often depends on the 
severity of the infection. Life-threatening infections generally require 
intravenous therapy. However, antibacterials that are well absorbed can be 
given by mouth even for some serious infections. Whenever possible 
painful intramuscular injections should be avoided in children. 

-   Duration of therapy depends on the nature of the infection and the 
response to treatment. Courses should not be unduly prolonged because 
this encourages resistance; furthermore, prolonged therapy may lead to 
unwanted side-effects and unnecessary expense. However, in certain 
infections, such as tuberculosis or chronic osteomyelitis, it is necessary to 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 97 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

treat for prolonged periods. Conversely, a single dose of an antibacterial 
may be all that is required to cure uncomplicated urinary tract infections. 

Superinfection 

In general, broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs such as the cefalosporins are 
more likely to be associated with adverse reactions related to the selection of 
resistant organisms, for example, fungal infections or antibiotic-associated 
colitis (pseudomembranous colitis); other problems associated with 
superinfection include vaginitis and pruritus ani.   

6.2.1 Beta Lactam medicines 

Beta Lactam antibiotics, which include penicillins, cefalosporins, and 
carbapenems, share a common structure; they are bactericidal, their 
mechanism of action resulting from inhibition of peptidoglycan, a 
mucopeptide in bacterial cell walls. Benzylpenicillin and phenoxy-

methylpenicillin are active against susceptible strains of Gram-positive bacteria 
and Gram-negative bacteria, spirochaetes, and actinomycetes, but are 
inactivated by penicillinase and other Beta Lactamases. Benzathine 

benzylpenicillin and procaine benzylpenicillin are long-acting preparations 
which slowly release benzylpenicillin on injection. A range of penicillins with 
improved stability to gastric acid and penicillinases have been produced by 
substitution of the 6-amino position of 6-aminopenicillanic acid. Cloxacillin is 
an isoxazoyl penicillin which is resistant to staphylococcal penicillinase. Broad-
spectrum penicillins such as ampicillin are acid-stable and active against Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria, but are inactivated by penicillinase. Beta 
Lactamase inhibitors such as clavulanic acid are often necessary to provide 
activity against beta-lactamases produced by a wide range of both Gram-
negative and Gram-positive bacteria.   
Cefalosporins are classified by generation, with the first generation agents have 
Gram-positive and some Gram-negative activity; the second generation drugs 
have improved Gram-negative activity, while the third generation cefalosporins 
have a wider spectrum of activity. Although the latter may be less active 
against Gram-positive bacteria than the first generation drugs, they are active 
against Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.  
Carbapenems are semi-synthetic derivatives of Streptomyces cattleya. They have a 
broad spectrum of activity and are stable to most penicillinases. They should 
be reserved for severe infections that are resistant to other antibiotics.   
Penicillins may cause encephalopathy due to cerebral irritation. This rare, but 
serious adverse effect, may occur with very high doses or in patients with 

98 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

severe renal failure. Penicillins should not be given by intrathecal injection 
because they can cause encephalopathy which may be fatal.   

Hypersensitivity 

The most important adverse effect of penicillins is hypersensitivity which 
causes rash and, occasionally anaphylaxis, which can be fatal. A careful history 
should be taken with regard to previous allergic reactions. If rash develops, 
another antimicrobial should be substituted. Allergic reactions to penicillins 
occur in 1–10% of exposed individuals, while anaphylactic reactions occur in 
fewer than 0.05% of treated patients. Individuals with a history of anaphylaxis, 
urticaria, or rash immediately after penicillin administration are at risk of 
immediate hypersensitivity to a penicillin. These individuals should not receive 
a penicillin, a cephalosporin, or any other Beta Lactam antibiotic. Patients who 
are allergic to one penicillin will be allergic to them all because hypersensitivity 
is related to the basic penicillin structure; moreover, about 10% of penicillin-
sensitive patients will be allergic to cefalosporins and other Beta Lactams. 
Individuals with a history of a minor rash (a non-confluent rash restricted to a 
small area of the body) or a rash occurring more than 72 hours after penicillin 
administration are possibly not allergic to penicillin and in these individuals, a 
penicillin should not be withheld unnecessarily for a serious infection; however, 
the possibility of an allergic reaction should be borne in mind and facilities 
should be available for treating anaphylaxis.  

Benzylpenicillins and phenoxymethylpenicillin  
Benzylpenicillin remains an important and useful antibiotic but it is inactivated 
by bacterial beta-lactamases. It is effective for many streptococcal (including 
pneumococcal), gonococcal, and meningococcal infections, and also for 
anthrax, diphtheria, gas gangrene, leptospirosis, tetanus, and treatment of 
Lyme disease in children. Pneumococci, meningococci, and gonococci often have 
decreased sensitivity to penicillins such as benzylpenicillin is now no longer the 
first choice for pneumococcal meningitis. Benzylpenicillin is given by injection 
as it is inactivated by gastric acid and absorption from the intestinal tract is low. 
Depot preparations are used when therapeutic concentrations need to be 
sustained for several hours. Both benzathine benzylpenicillin and procaine 
benzylpenicillin provide a tissue depot from which is slowly absorbed over a 
period of 12 hours to several days. They are the preferred choice for the 
treatment of syphilis or yaws.  
Phenoxymethylpenicillin is suitable for oral administration; it has a similar 
spectrum of activity to benzylpenicillin but is less effective. It should not be 
used for serious infections because absorption can be unpredictable and 
plasma concentrations variable. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 99 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Amoxicillin, amoxicillin with clavulanic acid, ampicillin and 
cloxacillin  
Amoxicillin has a similar spectrum of activity to ampicillin, and is also 
inactivated by penicillinases. However, it is better absorbed after oral 
administration than ampicillin and higher plasma and tissue levels are achieved. 
Amoxicillin is preferred to ampicillin for the treatment of some infections 
including otitis media and respiratory tract and urinary tract infections.  
Ampicillin is active against certain Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
organisms. It is used to treat a wide range of infections including otitis media, 
respiratory tract and urinary tract infections, and gonorrhoea due to 
susceptible bacteria. However, ampicillin is inactivated by penicillinases 
including those produced by Staphylococcus aureus and by common Gram-
negative bacilli such as Escherichia coli; many strains of Haemophilus influenzae, 
Moraxella catarrhalis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Salmonella and Shigella spp. are 
resistant. There are geographical variations in the incidence of resistance and 
an awareness of local patterns of resistance is important. In some areas, oral 
use should be restricted to treatment of Shigella infections; the recommended 
regimen in such cases is 1 g every 6 hours for 7–10 days.  
Clavulanic acid  is a beta-lactamase inhibitor. It has no significant antibacterial 
activity but in combination with amoxicillin widens amoxicillin’s spectrum of 
activity and allows its use against amoxicillin-resistant strains of bacteria. It is 
used in respiratory tract, genitourinary, and abdominal infections, cellulitis, 
animal bites, and dental infections.  
Cloxacillin is used to treat infections due to penicillinase-producing 
staphylococci which are resistant to benzylpenicillin. It is acid-stable and may 
therefore be given by mouth as well as by injection.  
These antibiotics may also be administered with an aminoglycoside to increase 
their spectrum of activity. The penicillin and the aminoglycoside should not be 
mixed before or during administration, because loss of aminoglycoside activity 
can occur on mixing. 

Cefalosporins  
Cefazolin is a first generation cefalosporin. Cefazolin is active against Gram-
positive bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus spp., and Gram-
negative bacteria including Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp. Cefazolin is used 
for surgical prophylaxis of infection in clean surgery where there is no 
inflammation present, and where the respiratory, alimentary, or genitourinary 
tract are not entered. This would include herniorrhaphy, cardiac, vascular, 
neurological, orthopaedic, and breast surgery. Cefazolin is also used for 
prophylaxis in surgery where contamination can be controlled, for example, in 
caesarian section and abdominal hysteroscopy.  

100 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Cefixime, ceftazidime, and ceftriaxone are third generation cefalosporins. 
Cefixime is orally active and is used for the treatment of uncomplicated 
gonorrhoea. Ceftriaxone is used for serious infections such as septicaemia, 
pneumonia, and meningitis; it is used as a reserve antimicrobial to treat 
meningitis due to Streptococcus pneumoniae in some areas where penicillin 
resistance is found. Ceftazidime is active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
other Gram-negative bacteria; it is used in the treatment of pseudomonas 
infections but in some countries its use is restricted to where gentamicin 
resistance is high.   

Carbapenems 
Imipenem is a broad-spectrum antibiotic. As it is partially inactivated by 
enzymatic activity in the kidney, it is administered with cilastatin which 
inhibits the renal metabolism of imipenem. It is active against many aerobic 
and anaerobic Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria; in some areas it is 
kept in reserve for the treatment of infections due to Acinetobacter spp. and 
P. aeruginosa, which are often resistant to other more usual treatments. 

Amoxicillin 
Capsule or tablet: 250 mg; 500 mg (anhydrous).  
Powder for oral liquid: 125 mg (anhydrous)/5 ml. 

Uses: urinary tract infections, upper respiratory tract infections, bronchitis; 
pneumonia; otitis media; dental abscess and other oral infections; 
osteomyelitis; Lyme disease; endocarditis prophylaxis; post-splenectomy 
prophylaxis; gynaecological infections; gonorrhoea; anthrax; Helicobacter 
pylori eradication (section 17.1).  

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above). 
Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); erythematous rash common in glandular 
fever, cytomegalovirus infection, chronic lymphatic leukaemia, and 
sometimes in HIV infection; maintain adequate hydration with high doses 
(risk of crystalluria); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose: 
Infections due to sensitive organisms, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 
10 years, 250 mg every 8 hours, doubled in severe infections; CHILD up to 
10 years, 125 mg every 8 hours, doubled in severe infections. 

Severe or recurrent purulent respiratory tract infections, by mouth, ADULT, 3 g 
every 12 hours. 

Pneumonia, by mouth, ADULT, 0.5–1 g every 8 hours 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 101 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dental abscess (short course), by mouth, ADULT, 3 g repeated once after 8 hours. 
Urinary tract infections (short course), by mouth, ADULT, 3 g repeated once after 
10–12 hours. 

Uncomplicated genital chlamydial infection, non-gonococcal urethritis, by 
mouth, ADULT, 500 mg every 8 hours for 7 days. 

Gonorrhoea (short course), by mouth, ADULT, 3 g as a single dose (with 
probenecid, 1 g). 

Otitis media, by mouth, ADULT, 1 g every 8 hours; CHILD, 40 mg/kg daily in 
3 divided doses (maximum, 3 g daily). 

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea; rash (hypersensitivity or toxic 
response; may be indicative of a serious reaction – discontinue treatment); 
hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis, 
serum sickness-like reactions, haemolytic anaemia, and interstitial nephritis 
(see also introductory note above); rarely antibiotic-associated colitis; 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders; rarely central 
nervous system disorders including convulsions (associated with high doses 
or impaired renal function). 

Amoxicillin + clavulanic acid 
Tablet: 500 mg + 125 mg. 

Uses: infections due to beta-lactamase-producing bacteria (where amoxicillin 
alone is not appropriate) including respiratory tract infections, otitis media, 
genitourinary and abdominal infections, cellulitis, animal bites, severe dental 
infections, Haemophilus influenzae osteomyelitis, and surgical prophylaxis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
history of penicillin- or amoxicillin with clavulanic acid-associated jaundice 
or hepatic dysfunction. 

Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); erythematous rash (common in glandular 
fever, cytomegalovirus infection), chronic lymphatic leukaemia, and possibly 
HIV infection; maintain adequate hydration with high doses (risk of 
crystalluria); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. All doses expressed as amoxicillin. 

Infections due to susceptible beta-lactamase-producing organisms, by mouth, 
ADULT and CHILD over 12 years, 250 mg every 8 hours, doubled in severe 
infections; CHILD under 1 year, 20 mg/kg daily in 3 divided doses; CHILD 
1–6 years, 125 mg every 8 hours; CHILD 6–12 years, 250 mg every 8 hours. 

102 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Severe dental infections, by mouth, ADULT, 250 mg every 8 hours for 5 days. 
Infections due to susceptible beta-lactamase-producing organisms, by 
intravenous injection over 3–4 minutes, ADULT and CHILD over 12 years, 1 g 
every 8 hours, increased to 1 g every 6 hours in severe infections; NEONATE 
and PREMATURE INFANT, 25 mg/kg every 12 hours; INFANT up to 3 
months, 25 mg/kg every 8 hours; CHILD 3 months to 12 years, 25 mg/kg 
every 8 hours, increased to 25 mg/kg every 6 hours in more severe 
infections. 

Surgical prophylaxis, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 1 g at induction, with up to 
2–3 further doses of 1 g every 8 hours if increased risk of infection. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea; rash (hypersensitivity or toxic 
response; may be indicative of a serious reaction – discontinue treatment); 
hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis, 
serum sickness-type reactions, haemolytic anaemia, and interstitial nephritis 
(see also introductory note above); rarely antibiotic-associated colitis; 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders; dizziness, headache, 
convulsions (particularly with high doses or in renal impairment); hepatitis, 
cholestatic jaundice; Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
exfoliative dermatitis, and vasculitis reported; superficial staining of teeth 
with suspension; phlebitis at injection site. 

Ampicillin 
Powder for injection: 500 mg; 1 g (as sodium salt) in vial. 

Uses: mastoiditis; gynaecological infections; septicaemia; peritonitis; 
endocarditis; meningitis; cholecystitis; osteomyelitis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above). 
Precautions: history of allergy (see introductory note above); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); erythematous rash (common in glandular fever, acute or 
chronic lymphatic leukaemia, and cytomegalovirus infection); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Severe infections due to sensitive organisms, by intramuscular injection, by slow 
intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 500 mg every 4–6 hours; 
CHILD under 10 years, half the adult dose. 

Meningitis, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 1–2 g every 3–6 hours (maximum, 
14 g daily); CHILD, 150–200 mg/kg daily in divided doses. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 103 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Listerial meningitis (in combination with another antibacterial), by intravenous 
infusion, ADULT, 12 g daily in divided doses every 4–6 hours for 10–14 days; 
NEONATE under 7 days, 50–100 mg/kg every 12 hours; NEONATE 7–21 days, 
50–100 mg/kg every 8 hours; NEONATE 21–28 days, 50–100 mg/kg every 
6 hours; CHILD 1 month–12 years, 50 mg/kg every 4–6 hours (maximum, 
2 g every 4 hours). 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea; rash (hypersensitivity or toxic 
response; may be indicative of a serious reaction — discontinue treatment); 
hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis, 
serum sickness-like reactions, haemolytic anaemia, and interstitial nephritis 
(see also introductory note above); rarely antibiotic-associated colitis; 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders. 

Benzathine benzylpenicillin 
Powder for injection: 1.44 g benzylpenicillin (= 2.4 million IU) in 5-ml vial. 

Uses: streptococcal pharyngitis; diphtheria; syphilis and other treponemal 
infections (yaws, pinta, bejel); rheumatic fever prophylaxis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
intravascular injection; neurosyphilis. 

Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
renal failure (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Streptococcal pharyngitis; primary prophylaxis of rheumatic fever, by deep 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD over 30 kg, 900 mg as a single dose; 
CHILD under 30 kg, 450–675 mg as a single dose. 

Secondary prophylaxis of rheumatic fever, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT 
and CHILD over 30 kg, 900 mg once every 3–4 weeks; CHILD under 30 kg, 
450 mg once every 3–4 weeks. 

Early syphilis, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 1.8 g as a single dose, 
divided between 2 sites. 

Late syphilis, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 1.8 g, divided between 2 sites, 
once weekly for 3 consecutive weeks. 

Congenital syphilis (where no evidence of CSF involvement), by deep 
intramuscular injection, CHILD up to 2 years, 37.5 mg/kg as a single dose 

Yaws, pinta, bejel, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 900 mg as a single dose; 
CHILD, 450 mg as a single dose. 

104 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, fever, joint pains, 
rash, angioedema, anaphylaxis, serum sickness-like reactions, haemolytic 
anaemia, and interstitial nephritis (see also introductory note above); 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders; rarely central 
nervous system toxicity (associated with high dosage or severe renal failure); 
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (during treatment for syphilis and other 
spirochaete infections, probably due to release of endotoxins); rarely non-
allergic (embolic–toxic) reactions; pain and inflammation at injection site. 

Benzylpenicillin 
Powder for injection: 600 mg (= 1 million IU); 3 g (= 5 million IU) (sodium or 
potassium salt) in vial. 

Also known as penicillin G. 

Uses: pneumonia; throat infections; otitis media; Lyme disease; streptococcal 
endocarditis; meningococcal disease; necrotizing enterocolitis; necrotizing 
fasciitis; leptospirosis; neurosyphilis; anthrax; relapsing fever; actinomycosis; 
brain abscess; gas gangrene; cellulitis; osteomyelitis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
avoid intrathecal route (see introductory note above). 

Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
renal failure (Appendix 4); heart failure; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Mild to moderate infections due to sensitive organisms, by intramuscular injection, 
by slow intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 2.4–4.8 g daily in 
4 divided doses, with higher doses in severe infections; NEONATE under 
1 week, 50 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses; NEONATE 1–4 weeks, 75 mg/kg 
daily in 3 divided doses; CHILD 1 month–12 years, 100 mg/kg daily in 
4 divided doses, with higher doses in severe infections. 

Bacterial endocarditis, by slow intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 
7.2–14.4 g daily in 6 divided doses. 

Meningococcal disease, by slow intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 
up to 14.4 g daily in divided doses; PREMATURE INFANT and NEONATE 
under 1 week, 100 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses; NEONATE 1–4 weeks, 
150 mg/kg daily in 3 divided doses; CHILD 1 month–12 years,  
180–300 mg/kg daily in 4–6 divided doses. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 105 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Suspected meningococcal disease (before transfer to hospital), by intramuscular 
injection or by slow intravenous injection, ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, 1.2 g; 
INFANT under 1 year, 300 mg; CHILD 1–9 years, 600 mg. 

Neurosyphilis, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 1.8–2.4 g every 4 hours for 
2 weeks. 

Congenital syphilis, by slow intravenous injection, CHILD up to 2 years, 30 mg/kg 
twice daily for the first 7 days of life, then 30 mg/kg 3 times daily for 3 days; 
by intramuscular injection or slow intravenous injection, CHILD over 2 years,  
120–180 mg/kg (maximum, 1.44 g) daily in 4–6 divided doses for 10–
14 days. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. Intravenous route preferred for neonates and infants; doses over 1.2 g 
should be given by the intravenous route only. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, fever, joint pains, 
rash, angioedema, anaphylaxis, serum sickness-like reactions, haemolytic 
anaemia, and interstitial nephritis (see also introductory notes above); 
diarrhoea, antibiotic-associated colitis; neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, 
coagulation disorders; central nervous system toxicity including convulsions, 
coma, and encephalopathy (associated with high dosage or severe renal 
failure); electrolyte disturbances; Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (during 
treatment for syphilis and other spirochaete infections, probably due to 
release of endotoxins); inflammation, phlebitis or thrombophlebitis at 
injection sites. 

Cefazolin 
Powder for injection: 1 g (as sodium salt) in vial. 

Uses: prophylaxis of infection in surgery. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to cefalosporins.  
Precautions: sensitivity to Beta Lactam antibacterials (avoid if history of 
immediate hypersensitivity reactions; see introductory note above); 
moderate renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); use may result in false positive urinary glucose 
(if tested for reducing substances) and false positive Coombs' test; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Surgical prophylaxis, by deep intramuscular injection, by intravenous injection (over at 
least 3–5 minutes), or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 1 g as a single dose at 
induction of anaesthesia, or after cord clamping in caesarean section, 
repeated if necessary if surgery lasts over 3 hours; CHILD, 25 mg/kg 

106 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

(maximum, 1 g) as a single dose at induction of anaesthesia, repeated if 
necessary if surgery lasts over 3 hours.  

NOTE. Further doses may be given every 6–8 hours post-operatively for 24 hours if 
necessary, or for up to 5 days in continued risk of infection (consult manufacturer’s 
literature). 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions; intramuscular administration may be painful and should be avoided where 
possible. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, nausea, rash, electrolyte disturbances, cholestatic 
hepatitis, pain and inflammation at injection site; antibiotic-associated colitis; 
less commonly vomiting, headache, dizziness, and fever; rarely confusion 
(particularly following large doses and in renal impairment), arthritis, serum 
sickness-like reactions, neurotoxicity (including seizures), blood disorders 
(including neutropenia, eosinophilia, thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, 
thrombocythaemia, haemolytic anaemia, and bleeding), renal impairment 
(including interstitial nephritis), allergic reactions (including urticaria, 
anaphylaxis, angioedema, and bronchial obstruction), and abnormal liver 
function tests; erythema multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis also 
reported. 

Cefixime 
Capsule: 400 mg. 

Uses: uncomplicated gonorrhoea. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to cefalosporins. 
Precautions: sensitivity to Beta Lactam antibacterials (avoid if history of 

immediate hypersensitivity reaction; see introductory note above); moderate 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); use may result in false positive urinary glucose (if tested for 
reducing substances) and false positive Coombs' test; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Uncomplicated anogenital gonorrhoea, by mouth, ADULT, 400 mg as a single 
dose. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, abdominal discomfort, 
headache; rarely antibiotic-associated colitis (particularly with higher doses); 
allergic reactions including rash, pruritus, urticaria, serum sickness-like 
reactions, fever and arthralgia, and anaphylaxis; erythema multiforme and 
toxic epidermal necrolysis reported; transient hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice; 
eosinophilia and blood disorders (including thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, 
agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, and haemolytic anaemia); reversible 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 107 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

interstitial nephritis, hyperactivity, nervousness, sleep disturbances, 
hallucinations, confusion, hypertonia, and dizziness. 

Ceftazidime 
Powder for injection: 250 mg (as pentahydrate) in vial. 

Ceftazidime is a complementary list antibacterial drug for use only when there is 
significant resistance to other medicines on the WHO Model List. 

Uses: infections due to sensitive bacteria, especially those due to Pseudomonas 
spp. and those resistant to aminoglycosides. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to cefalosporins; porphyria. 
Precautions: sensitivity to Beta Lactam antibacterials (avoid if history of 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction; see introductory note above); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4);  pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); use may result in false positive urinary glucose (if tested for 
reducing substances) and false positive Coombs’ test; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible organisms, by deep intramuscular injection, by 
intravenous injection, or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 1 g every 8 hours or 2 g 
every 12 hours; in severe infections (including in the immunocompromised), 
2 g every 8–12 hours or 3 g every 12 hours (in the elderly, usual maximum, 
3 g daily); NEONATE and INFANT up to 2 months, 25–60 mg/kg daily in 
2 divided doses; CHILD over 2 months, 30–100 mg/kg daily in 2–3 divided 
doses (intravenous route recommended for children). 

Pseudomonal lung infection in cystic fibrosis, by deep intramuscular injection, by 
intravenous injection, or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 100–150 mg/kg daily in 
3 divided doses. 

Infections in the immunocompromised, cystic fibrosis, or meningitis, by 
intravenous injection or intravenous infusion, CHILD over 2 months up to 
150 mg/kg daily in 3 divided doses (maximum, 6 g daily).  

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. Intramuscular doses over 1 g should be divided between more than one site. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, abdominal discomfort, 
headache; rarely antibiotic-associated colitis (particularly with higher doses); 
allergic reactions including rash, pruritus, urticaria, serum sickness-like 
reactions, fever and arthralgia, and anaphylaxis; erythema multiforme and 
toxic epidermal necrolysis reported; transient hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice; 
eosinophilia and blood disorders (including thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, 
agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, and haemolytic anaemia); reversible 

108 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

interstitial nephritis; nervousness, sleep disturbances, confusion, hypertonia, 
and dizziness. 

Ceftriaxone 
Powder for injection: 250 mg; 1 g (as sodium salt) in vial. 

Ceftriaxone is a representative third generation cefalosporin antibiotic. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Ceftriaxone is a complementary list medicine for use only when there is significant 
resistance to other antibacterial medicines on the WHO Model List. 

Uses: serious infections due to sensitive bacteria, including septicaemia, 
pneumonia, and meningitis; osteomyelitis, septic arthritis; Haemophilus 
influenzae epiglottis; surgical prophylaxis; prophylaxis of meningococcal 
meningitis; shigellosis, invasive salmonellosis; endocarditis; gonococcal 
conjunctivitis; gonorrhoea; pelvic inflammatory disease; Lyme disease. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to cefalosporins; porphyria; neonates with 
jaundice, hypoalbuminaemia, acidosis or impaired bilirubin binding. 

Precautions: sensitivity to Beta Lactam antibacterials (avoid if history of 
immediate hypersensitivity reactions; see introductory note above); severe 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment if accompanied by renal 
impairment (Appendix 5); premature neonates (may displace bilirubin from 
serum albumin); treatment longer than 14 days, renal failure, dehydration, 
or concomitant total parenteral nutrition (risk of ceftriaxone precipitation in 
gallbladder); pregnancy and breastfeeding (but appropriate to use, see 
Appendices 2 and 3); false positive urinary glucose (if tested for reducing 
substances) and false positive Coombs’ test; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible organisms, by deep intramuscular injection, by 
intravenous injection (over at least 2–4 minutes), or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 
1 g daily; up to 2–4 g daily in severe infections; INFANT and CHILD under 
50 kg, 20–50 mg/kg daily should  be given, up to 80 mg/kg daily in severe 
infections (doses of 50 mg/kg and over by intravenous infusion only); by 
intravenous infusion (over 60 minutes), NEONATE, 20–50 mg/kg daily 
(maximum, 50 mg/kg daily). 

Uncomplicated gonorrhoea and gonococcal conjunctivitis, by deep intramuscular 
injection, ADULT, 125 mg as a single dose (also used with doxycycline and 
metronidazole to treat pelvic inflammatory disease). 

Neonatal gonococcal conjunctivitis, by intramuscular injection, NEONATE, 
50 mg/kg as a single dose (maximum, 125 mg). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 109 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Disseminated gonococcal infection, by deep intramuscular injection or by intravenous 
injection, ADULT, 1 g daily for 7 days. 

Surgical prophylaxis, by deep intramuscular injection or by intravenous injection (over 
at least 2–4 minutes), ADULT, 1 g at induction. 

Colorectal surgery (with an antibacterial active against anaerobes), by deep 
intramuscular injection, by intravenous injection (over at least 2–4 minutes), or by 
intravenous infusion, ADULT, 2 g as a single dose. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. Intramuscular doses over 1 g should be divided between more than one site. 
Administer by intravenous infusion over 60 minutes in neonates (see also 
Contraindications). 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, abdominal discomfort, 
headache; rarely antibiotic-associated colitis (particularly with higher doses); 
allergic reactions including rash, pruritus, urticaria, serum sickness-like 
reactions, fever and arthralgia, and anaphylaxis; erythema multiforme and 
toxic epidermal necrolysis reported; transient hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice; 
eosinophilia and blood disorders (including thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, 
agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, and haemolytic anaemia); reversible 
interstitial nephritis, hyperactivity, nervousness, sleep disturbances, 
hallucinations, confusion, hypertonia and dizziness; calcium ceftriaxone 
precipitates in the urine (particularly in the very young, the dehydrated, or in 
those who are immobilized) or in the gallbladder (consider discontinuation 
if symptomatic); rarely prolongation of prothrombin time and pancreatitis. 

Cloxacillin 
Capsule: 500 mg; 1 g (as sodium salt).  
Powder for injection: 500 mg (as sodium salt) in vial.  
Powder for oral liquid: 125 mg (as sodium salt)/5 ml. 

Cloxacillin is a representative penicillinase-resistant penicillin. Various medicines (such 
as dicloxacillin) can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: infections due to beta-lactamase-producing staphylococci including 
impetigo, cellulitis, and other soft-tissue infections; pyomyositis; 
staphylococcal endocarditis, septicaemia, pneumonia, septic arthritis, and 
osteomyelitis; otitis externa. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above). 
Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4) and hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); heart 
failure; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

110 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible beta-lactamase-producing staphylococci, ADULT, 
by mouth, 500 mg 4 times daily, doubled in severe infection; by intramuscular 
injection, 250 mg every 4–6 hours, doubled in severe infection; by slow 
intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, 1–2 g every 6 hours; CHILD up to 
2 years, quarter the adult dose; CHILD 2–10 years, half the adult dose. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea; hypersensitivity reactions 
including urticaria, fever, joint pain, rash, angioedema, anaphylaxis, serum 
sickness-like reactions, haemolytic anaemia, and interstitial nephritis (see 
also introductory note above); neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulation 
disorders; rarely antibiotic-associated colitis; hepatitis and cholestatic 
jaundice (may be delayed in onset); electrolyte disturbances; pain, 
inflammation, phlebitis, or thrombophlebitis at injection sites. 

Imipenem + cilastatin 
Powder for injection: 250 mg (as monohydrate) + 250 mg (as sodium salt); 
500 mg (as monohydrate) + 500 mg (as sodium salt) in vial. 

Imipenem with cilastatin is a complementary list antibacterial combination for use only 
when there is significant resistance to other medicines on the WHO Model List. 

Uses: severe aerobic and anaerobic Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
infections in hospital (not indicated for CNS infections), including 
infections caused by resistant Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter spp. 

Precautions: sensitivity to Beta Lactam antibacterials (avoid if history of 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction; see introductory note above); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); central nervous system disorders, such as 
epilepsy; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of imipenem. 

Infections due to susceptible organisms, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 1–2 g 
daily in 3–4 divided doses; less susceptible organisms, ADULT, up to 
50 mg/kg daily (maximum, 4 g daily) in 3–4 divided doses; CHILD over 
3 months, 60 mg/kg daily (maximum, 2 g daily) in 4 divided doses; CHILD 
over 40 kg, adult dose. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

The intramuscular  preparation must not be administered intravenously. 

The infusion preparation must not be administered intramuscularly. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 111 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea; antibiotic-associated colitis; 
taste disturbances; tooth or tongue discoloration, hearing loss; blood 
disorders, positive Coombs’ test; allergic reactions including rash, pruritus, 
urticaria, erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome), fever, and 
anaphylactic reactions; rarely toxic epidermal necrolysis, and exfoliative 
dermatitis; myoclonic activity, convulsions, confusion, and mental 
disturbances; slight increase in liver enzymes and bilirubin, rarely hepatitis; 
increases in serum creatinine and blood urea; red coloration of urine in 
children; erythema, pain and induration, and thrombophlebitis at injection 
sites. 

Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
Powder for oral liquid: 250 mg (as potassium salt)/5 ml. 
Tablet: 250 mg (as potassium salt). 

Also known as penicillin V. 

Uses: streptococcal pharyngitis; otitis media; cellulitis; mouth infections; 
secondary prophylaxis of rheumatic fever; post-splenectomy prophylaxis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
serious infections (see introductory note above). 

Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose: 
Infections due to sensitive organisms, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg every 6 hours 
increased up to 1 g every 6 hours in severe infections; CHILD up to 1 year, 
62.5 mg every 6 hours; CHILD 1–5 years, 125 mg every 6 hours; CHILD  
6–12 years, 250 mg every 6 hours. 

Secondary prophylaxis of rheumatic fever, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg twice daily; 
CHILD 1–5 years, 125 mg twice daily; CHILD 6–12 years, 250 mg twice daily. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Phenoxymethylpenicillin should be taken at least 30 minutes 
before, or 2 hours after, food. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, joint pain, rash, 
angioedema, and anaphylaxis (see also introductory note above); nausea and 
diarrhoea. 

 
 
 
 

112 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Procaine benzylpenicillin 
Powder for injection: 1 g (= 1 million IU); 3 g (= 3 million IU) in vial. 

Uses: syphilis; anthrax; pneumonia; diphtheria; cellulitis; mouth infections; 
animal bites. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to penicillins (see introductory note above); 
intravascular injection 

Precautions: history of allergy to penicillins (see note above); renal failure 
(Appendix 4); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Infections due to sensitive organisms, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT,  
0.6–1.2 g daily. 

Pneumonia, by deep intramuscular injection, CHILD, 50 mg/kg daily for 10 days. 
Syphilis, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 1.2 g daily for 10–15 days, or up 
to 3 weeks in late syphilis. 

Neurosyphilis, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 1.2 g daily (together with 
probenecid, 500 mg 4 times daily by mouth) for 10–14 days. 

Congenital syphilis, by deep intramuscular injection, CHILD up to 2 years, 50 mg/kg 
daily for 10 days. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, fever, joint pains, 
rash, angioedema, anaphylaxis, serum sickness-like reactions, haemolytic 
anaemia, and interstitial nephritis (see also introductory note above); 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders and central nervous 
system toxicity (associated with high doses and severe renal failure); Jarisch-
Herxheimer reaction (during treatment for syphilis and other spirochaete 
infections, probably due to release of endotoxins); rarely, non-allergic 
(embolic–toxic) reactions; pain and inflammation at injection site. 

6.2.2 Other antibacterials 

Azithromycin 
Capsule: 250 mg or 500 mg. 
Oral liquid: 200 mg/5 ml. 

Azithromycin is more active than erythromycin against some Gram-negative organisms 
such as Chlamydia trachomatis. The concentration and persistence of azithromycin is 
much higher in tissue than in plasma. A single dose of azithromycin is recommended 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 113 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

for use in the treatment of uncomplicated genital chlamydia and trachoma, but it is not 
recommended if there is a possibility of gonorrhoea because macrolide resistance 
emerges rapidly when it is used under these circumstances.  

Uses: uncomplicated genital chlamydial infections and trachoma. 
Contraindications: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5). 
Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
prolongation of QT interval (ventricular tachycardia reported); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Uncomplicated genital chlamydial infections, trachoma, by mouth, ADULT over 
45 kg, 1 g as a single dose; ADULT, under 45 kg, 20 mg/kg as a single dose. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Not to be taken at the same time as aluminium- or magnesium-
containing indigestion remedies. Capsules should be taken at least 1 hour before, or 
2 hours after, food; oral suspension can be taken with food. 

Adverse effects: see under Erythromycin (but fewer gastrointestinal effects); 
also anorexia, dyspepsia, flatulence, constipation, pancreatitis; syncope, 
dizziness, headache, drowsiness, agitation, anxiety, hyperactivity; 
photosensitivity; hepatitis, interstitial nephritis, acute renal failure, asthenia, 
paraesthesia, arthralgia, convulsions, mild neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, 
tinnitus, hepatic necrosis, hepatic failure, tongue discoloration, and taste 
disturbances. 

Chloramphenicol 
Capsule: 250 mg.  
Oily suspension for injection: 0.5 g (as sodium succinate)/ml in 2-ml 
ampoule.  
Oral liquid: 150 mg (as palmitate)/5 ml. 
Powder for injection: 1 g (sodium succinate) in vial. 

Chloramphenicol is a potent broad-spectrum antibiotic. However, it is associated with 
serious haematological adverse effects and should be reserved for the treatment of 
severe infections, particularly those caused by Haemophilus influenzae and typhoid fever. 
The oily suspension should be reserved for use in situations of catastrophic epidemics 
of meningococcal meningitis, such as those that occur in sub-Saharan Africa, in which 
the scale of the epidemic often overwhelms the medical services and precludes any 
other form of antimicrobial therapy.  

Uses: severe life-threatening infections, particularly those caused by 
Haemophilus influenzae and typhoid fever; also, pneumonia; cerebral abscess; 
mastoiditis; rickettsia; relapsing fever; gangrene; granuloma inguinale; 
listeriosis; plague; psitticosis; tularaemia; Whipple disease; septicaemia; 
meningitis.  

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); porphyria. 

114 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Precautions: avoid repeated courses and prolonged use; hepatic impairment 
(reduce dose; Appendix 5); severe renal impairment (reduce dose; 
Appendix 4); blood counts required before and during treatment; monitor 
plasma concentrations in neonates (see below); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible organisms which are not susceptible to other 
antimicrobials, by mouth, by intravenous injection, or by intravenous infusion, ADULT 
and CHILD, 50 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses; up to 100 mg/kg daily in 
divided doses in severe infections such as meningitis, septicaemia, and 
haemophilus epiglottitis (reduce high doses as soon as clinically indicated); 
NEONATE under 2 weeks, 25 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses; INFANT 
2 weeks to 1 year, 50 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses. 

Epidemics of meningococcal meningitis, by intramuscular injection (of oily 
suspension), ADULT, 3 g as a single dose, repeated after 48 hours if 
necessary; INFANT 1–8 weeks, 250 mg as a single dose; INFANT  
2–11 months, 500 mg as a single dose; CHILD 1–2 years, 1 g as a single dose; 
CHILD 3–5 years, 1.5 g as a single dose; CHILD 6–9 years, 2 g as a single 
dose; CHILD 10–14 years, 2.5 g as a single dose; CHILD over 15 years, as for 
adult, repeated after 48 hours if necessary.   

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. The oily suspension is for intramuscular use only. 

NOTE. Plasma concentration monitoring is required in neonates and is preferred in 
those under 4 years of age, in the elderly, and in hepatic impairment; recommended 
peak plasma chloramphenicol concentration (measured approximately 1 hour after 
intravenous injection or infusion) is 15–25 mg/litre; pre-dose ‘trough’ concentration 
should not exceed 15 mg/litre. 

Adverse effects: bone marrow depression—reversible and irreversible aplastic 
anaemia (with reports of leukaemia), anaemia, leukopenia, and 
thrombocytopenia; nocturnal haemoglobinuria; peripheral neuritis and optic 
neuritis; nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, dry mouth, stomatitis, glossitis; 
headache, depression; hypersensitivity reactions including rash, urticaria, 
fever, angioedema, and rarely anaphylaxis; grey syndrome (vomiting, 
greenish diarrhoea, abdominal distension, hypothermia, pallid cyanosis, 
irregular respiration, circulatory collapse) may follow excessive doses in 
neonates with immature hepatic metabolism; grey syndrome also reported 
in infants born to mothers treated in late pregnancy. 

 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 115 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Ciprofloxacin 
Tablet: 250 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Ciprofloxacin is active against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. It is 
particularly active against salmonella, shigella, campylobacter, neisseria, Bacillus anthracis, 
and Pseudomonas ssp.. It is also active against chlamydia and some mycobacteria. Most 
anaerobic organisms are, however, not susceptible. Ciprofloxacin is used with 
doxycycline and metronidazole to treat pelvic inflammatory disease. 

Ciprofloxacin is a representative quinolone antibacterial. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives.  

Uses: gastroenteritis (including cholera, shigellosis, travellers’ diarrhoea, 
campylobacter, and salmonella enteritis); typhoid; gonorrhoea; chancroid; 
pelvic inflammatory disease (with doxycycline and metronidazole); 
legionnaires’ disease; meningitis (including meningococcal meningitis 
prophylaxis); respiratory tract infections (including pseudomonal infections 
in cystic fibrosis, but not pneumococcal pneumonia); urinary tract 
infections; bone and joint infections; septicaemia; anthrax; skin infections; 
otitis externa; prophylaxis in surgery. 

Contraindications: history of tendon disorders related to quinolone use (see 
below). 

Precautions: history of epilepsy or conditions that predispose to seizures, 
G6PD deficiency, myasthenia gravis (risk of exacerbation), pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3), children or adolescents (see 
below); avoid exposure to excessive sunlight (discontinue if photosensitivity 
occurs); rarely tendon damage (see below); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
avoid excessive alkalinity of urine and ensure adequate fluid intake (risk of 
crystalluria); interactions: Appendix 1. 

USE IN CHILDREN. Ciprofloxacin causes arthropathy in the weight-bearing joints of 
immature animals and is therefore generally not recommended for use in children and 
growing adolescents. However, the significance of this effect in humans is uncertain 
and in some specific circumstances, short-term use of ciprofloxacin in children may be 
justified. For example, ciprofloxacin is used to treat pseudomonal infections in cystic 
fibrosis (for children over 5 years), and for treatment and prophylaxis of inhalational 
anthrax. 

TENDON DAMAGE. Tendon damage (including rupture) has been reported rarely in 
patients receiving quinolones. Tendon rupture may occur within 48 hours of starting 
treatment. Health-care workers should be aware that:  

- quinolones are contraindicated in patients with a history of tendon disorders related 
to quinolone use;  

- elderly patients are more prone to tendinitis;  

- the risk of tendon rupture is increased by the concomitant use of corticosteroids;  

- if tendinitis is suspected, the quinolone should be discontinued immediately.  

116 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible organisms, by mouth, ADULT, 250–750 mg twice 
daily. 

Shigellosis, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days. 
Cholera, by mouth, ADULT, 1 g as a single dose. 
Acute uncomplicated cystitis, by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg twice daily for 3 days. 
Gonorrhoea and gonococcal conjunctivitis, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg as a 
single dose. 

Chancroid, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days. 
Pelvic inflammatory disease, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg twice daily. 
Pseudomonal lower respiratory tract infection in cystic fibrosis, by mouth, 

ADULT, 750 mg twice daily; CHILD 5–17 years, (see also Precautions), up to 
20 mg/kg twice daily (maximum, 1.5 g daily). 

Surgical prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 750 mg, 60–90 minutes before 
procedure. 

Prophylaxis of meningococcal meningitis, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg as a single 
dose. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, flatulence, 
diarrhoea (rarely antibiotic-associated colitis); pancreatitis, dysphagia, tremor, 
hyperglycaemia, headache, dizziness, sleep disorders, rash (rarely erythema 
multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and toxic epidermal necrolysis), 
pruritus; vasculitis, erythema nodosum, petechiae, haemorrhagic bullae; less 
frequently anorexia and increased blood urea and creatinine; drowsiness, 
restlessness, asthenia, depression, confusion, hallucinations, convulsions, 
paraesthesia, hypoesthesia, movement disorders; photosensitivity, 
hypersensitivity reactions (including fever, urticaria, angioedema, arthralgia, 
myalgia, and anaphylaxis); blood disorders (including eosinophilia, 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia); disturbances in vision, taste, hearing, and 
smell, tinnitus; tenosynovitis; tachycardia, hypotension, oedema, syncope, 
hot flushes and sweating; also isolated reports of tendon inflammation and 
damage (especially in the elderly and in those taking corticosteroids; see also 
above), haemolytic anaemia, renal failure, interstitial nephritis, and hepatic 
dysfunction (including hepatitis and cholestatic jaundice); discontinue if 
psychiatric, neurological, or hypersensitivity reactions (including severe rash) 
occur. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 117 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Clindamycin 
Capsule: 150 mg.  
Injection: 150 mg (as phosphate)/ml. 

Clindamycin is a bacteriostatic antibacterial with activity against Gram-positive aerobes 
and a wide range of anaerobes. However, its use is limited because of adverse effects. 
Antibiotic-associated colitis can occur with a wide range of antibacterials, but occurs 
most frequently with clindamycin. It may be fatal and is most common in women and 
the elderly; it can develop during or after treatment. Patients should discontinue 
treatment immediately if diarrhoea develops. Clindamycin is recommended for the 
treatment of staphylococcal bone and joint infections and for intra-abdominal sepsis. It 
is also used for endocarditis prophylaxis when a penicillin is not appropriate.  

Clindamycin is a complementary list medicine for use when penicillin is not appropriate. 

Uses: staphylococcal bone and joint infections, pyomyositis; necrotizing 
fasciitis; peritonitis; endocarditis prophylaxis; pelvic inflammatory disease 
(with gentamicin); pneumonia. 

Contraindications: diarrhoeal states; avoid injections containing benzyl alcohol 
in neonates; porphyria. 

Precautions: discontinue immediately if diarrhoea or colitis develop; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); monitor liver 
and renal function on prolonged therapy and in neonates and infants; the 
elderly; females; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
avoid rapid intravenous administration; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Osteomyelitis or peritonitis, by mouth, ADULT, 150–300 mg every 6 hours, up to 
450 mg every 6 hours in severe infections; CHILD, 3–6 mg/kg every 6 hours; 
by deep intramuscular injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 0.6–2.7 g daily in 
2–4 divided doses, increased up to 4.8 g daily in life-threatening infections 
(single doses over 600 mg should be given by intravenous infusion only; 
single doses given by intravenous infusion should not exceed 1.2 g); 
NEONATE, 15–20 mg/kg daily; CHILD over 1 month, 15–40 mg/kg daily in 
3–4 divided doses, increased to at least 300 mg daily, regardless of weight, 
in severe infections. 

Pelvic inflammatory disease, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 900 mg every 
8 hours. 

Endocarditis prophylaxis (for procedures under local or no anaesthetic), by 
mouth, ADULT, 600 mg, 1 hour before procedure. 

Endocarditis prophylaxis (for procedures under general anaesthetic), by 
intravenous infusion, ADULT, 300 mg over at least 10 minutes, at induction or 
15 minutes before procedure, followed by 150 mg 6 hours later by mouth 
or by intravenous infusion. 

118 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

PATIENT ADVICE. Patients should discontinue treatment immediately and contact 
doctor if diarrhoea develops; capsules should be swallowed with a glass of water. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea (discontinue treatment); nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal discomfort, oesophagitis, antibiotic-associated colitis; rash, 
pruritus, urticaria, and rarely anaphylaxis; Erythema multiforme (Stevens-
Johnson syndrome), exfoliative and vesiculobullous dermatitis; jaundice and 
altered liver function tests; neutropenia, eosinophilia, agranulocytosis, 
thrombocytopenia; pain, induration, and abscess after intramuscular 
injection; thrombophlebitis after intravenous injection. 

Doxycycline 
Capsule or tablet: 100 mg (hydrochloride). 

Doxycycline is a tetracycline and is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is effective for 
conditions caused by chlamydia, rickettsia, brucella, and the spirochaete, Borrelia 
burgdorferi (Lyme disease). It is the preferred tetracycline since it has a more favourable 
pharmacokinetic profile than other tetracyclines, including tetracycline. It is deposited 
in growing bone and teeth causing staining and occasionally dental hypoplasia. It should 
not be given to children under 8 years or pregnant women; in some countries, use in 
children under 12 years is contraindicated.  

Uses: supplement to quinine or artesunate treatment for multidrug-resistant 
P. falciparum malaria; short-term prophylaxis of multidrug-resistant 
P. falciparum malaria; see also notes above; bacterial infections 
(section 6.2.2).   

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); children under 8 years; porphyria; 
systemic lupus erythematosus. 

Precautions: avoid exposure to sunlight or sunlamps (photosensitivity 
reported); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Supplement to malaria treatment (see note above), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD 
over 8 years, 100 mg twice daily for 7–10 days. 

Short-term prophylaxis of malaria, by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg daily for up to 
8 weeks; CHILD over 8 years, 1.5 mg/kg daily for up to 8 weeks; doxycycline 
should be started on the day before exposure and continued for 4 weeks 
after last risk of exposure. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Capsules should be swallowed whole with plenty of fluid while 
sitting or standing to prevent oesophageal irritation. May be given with food or milk to 
counter gastric irritation. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 119 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances; anorexia; flushing, tinnitus; 
photosensitivity; hypersensitivity reactions (including rash, exfoliative 
dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis 
and pericarditis); headache and visual disturbances; hepatotoxicity, blood 
disorders, pancreatitis and antibiotic-associated colitis reported; staining of 
growing teeth and occasional dental hypoplasia. 

Erythromycin 
Capsule or tablet: 250 mg (as stearate or ethyl succinate). 
Powder for injection: 500 mg (as lactobionate) in vial.  
Powder for oral liquid: 125 mg (as stearate or ethyl succinate). 

Erythromycin is a macrolide; it has an antibacterial spectrum that is similar but not 
identical to penicillin and is used as an alternative in penicillin-allergic patients. It is 
effective in respiratory infections, whooping cough, legionnaires’ disease, and 
campylobacter enteritis.  

Erythromycin is a representative macrolide antibiotic. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: alternative to penicillin in hypersensitive patients; sinusitis; otitis externa; 
oral infections; cholera; respiratory tract infections (including pneumonia 
and legionnaires’ disease); syphilis; chancroid; chlamydia; neonatal 
chlamydial conjunctivitis; non-gonococcal urethritis; prostatitis; 
lymphogranuloma venereum; campylobacter enteritis; relapsing fever; skin 
infections; diphtheria; diphtheria and whooping cough prophylaxis; Q fever 
in children. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to erythromycin or other macrolides; 
porphyria. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5) and renal impairment 
(Appendix 4);  predisposition to QT interval prolongation (including 
electrolyte disturbances and concomitant use of drugs that prolong the QT 
interval); pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose: 
Infections due to sensitive organisms, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 8 years, 
250–500 mg every 6 hours, up to 4 g daily in severe infections; CHILD up to 
2 years, 125 mg every 6 hours, doubled in severe infections; CHILD  
2–8 years, 250 mg every 6 hours, doubled in severe infections. 

Early syphilis, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg 4 times daily for 14 days. 
Late latent syphilis, by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg 4 times daily for 30 days. 

120 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Uncomplicated genital chlamydia, non-gonococcal urethritis, chancroid, by 
mouth, ADULT, 500 mg 4 times daily for 7 days (14 days in lymphogranuloma 
venereum). 

Severe infections due to sensitive organisms, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and 
CHILD, 50 mg/kg daily by continuous infusion or in divided doses every 
6 hours. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Tablets and capsules should be swallowed whole.  

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal effects including nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
discomfort, diarrhoea, and rarely antibiotic-associated colitis; less frequently 
urticaria, rash, and other allergic reactions (rarely anaphylaxis); reversible 
hearing loss after large doses; cholestatic jaundice, infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis, cardiac effects (including chest pain and arrhythmias), 
myasthenia-like syndrome, erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome), toxic epidermal necrolysis. 

Gentamicin 
Injection: 10 mg; 40 mg (as sulfate)/ml in 2-ml vial. 

Aminoglycosides including gentamicin are bactericidal and active against some Gram-
positive and many Gram-negative organisms including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
Aminoglycosides are not absorbed from the gut and must therefore be given by 
injection for systemic infections. Excretion is mainly by the kidney and accumulation 
occurs in renal impairment.  

Gentamicin should only be prescribed and administered by trained health personnel. 
Care must be taken to ensure correct dosage and duration of treatment are not 
exceeded, because most adverse effects are dose related. The most important adverse 
effects are ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity and they are most common in the elderly and 
in patients with renal impairment. These groups and, if possible, all patients should be 
monitored for ototoxicity by audiometry. If there is impairment of renal function, the 
dose interval must be increased; in severe renal impairment, the dose should also be 
reduced. Serum concentration monitoring avoids both excessive and subtherapeutic 
concentrations and can prevent toxicity and ensure efficacy. If possible serum 
concentrations should be monitored in all patients, but must be measured in infants, 
the elderly, in obesity, in cystic fibrosis, in high-dosage regimens, in renal impairment, 
or if treatment lasts for longer than 7 days.  

Loading and maintenance doses of gentamicin are based on the patient’s weight and 
renal function (for example, using a nomogram) with adjustments based on plasma 
gentamicin concentration. High doses are used occasionally for serious infections. 

Gentamicin is a representative aminoglycoside antibiotic. Various medicines can serve 
as alternatives. 

Uses: pneumonia; cholecystitis; peritonitis; septicaemia; acute pyelonephritis; 
prostatitis; otitis externa; skin and soft tissue infections; pelvic inflammatory 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 121 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

disease (with clindamycin); endocarditis; meningitis; listeriosis; tularaemia; 
brucellosis; plague; surgical prophylaxis; eye infections (section 21.1). 

Contraindications: myasthenia gravis. 
Precautions: renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4); neonates, infants, 
and the elderly (adjust dosage and monitor renal, auditory, and vestibular 
function, and serum gentamicin concentrations); avoid prolonged use; 
conditions characterized by muscular weakness; obesity (use ideal body 
weight to calculate dose and monitor serum gentamicin concentration 
closely); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible organisms, by intramuscular injection or by slow 
intravenous injection (over at least 3 minutes) or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 
3–5 mg/kg daily in divided doses every 8 hours; NEONATE up to 2 weeks, 
3 mg/kg every 12 hours; CHILD 2 weeks–12 years, 2 mg/kg every 8 hours. 

Pelvic inflammatory disease (with clindamycin), by intravenous injection, ADULT, 
1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours. 

Endocarditis (as part of combination therapy), by intramuscular injection or by 
intravenous injection (over at least 3 minutes), ADULT, 1 mg/kg every 8 hours. 

Surgical prophylaxis (with clindamycin), by intravenous injection, ADULT, 5 mg/kg 
as a single dose at induction. 

NOTE. One hour (peak) concentrations should not exceed 5–10 mg/litre  
(3–5 mg/litre for endocarditis); pre-dose (trough) concentration should be less than 
2 mg/litre (less than 1 mg/litre in endocarditis). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: vestibular and auditory damage, nephrotoxicity; rarely, 
hypomagnesaemia on prolonged therapy; antibiotic-associated colitis, 
stomatitis; also nausea, vomiting, rash, and blood disorders. 

Metronidazole 
Injection: 500 mg in 100-ml vial. 
Oral liquid: 200 mg (as benzoate)/5 ml. 
Suppository: 500 mg; 1 g. 
Tablet: 200-500 mg. 

Metronidazole has high activity against anaerobic bacteria and protozoa (see also 
section 6.5.1). Metronidazole by the rectal route is an effective alternative to the 
intravenous route when oral administration is not possible.   

Metronidazole is a representative antibacterial and antiprotozoal drug. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

122 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Uses: anaerobic bacterial infections, including gingivitis and other oral 
infections, pelvic inflammatory disease (with doxycycline and either 
ciprofloxacin or ceftriaxone; section 6.2.1), tetanus, septicaemia, peritonitis, 
brain abscess, necrotizing pneumonia, antibiotic-associated colitis, leg ulcers 
and pressure sores and surgical prophylaxis; bacterial vaginosis; skin and 
soft tissue infections, animal bites (with doxycycline); tissue nematode 
infections in particular, dracunculiasis (section 6.1.1); trichomonal vaginitis, 
amoebiasis, and giardiasis (section 6.5.1); Helicobacter pylori eradication 
(section 17.1); Crohn disease (section 17.3). 

Contraindications: chronic alcohol dependence.   
Precautions: disulfiram-like reaction with alcohol; hepatic impairment and 
hepatic encephalopathy (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); clinical and laboratory monitoring 
recommended in courses lasting longer than 10 days; interactions: 
Appendix 1.  

Dose:  
Anaerobic infections (usually treated for 7 days), by mouth, ADULT, 800 mg 
initially, then 400 mg every 8 hours or 500 mg every 8 hours; CHILD, 
7.5 mg/kg every 8 hours. 

Anaerobic infections, by intravenous infusion over 20 minutes, ADULT, 500 mg 
every 8 hours; CHILD, 7.5 mg/kg every 8 hours. 

Anaerobic infections, by rectum, ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, 1 g every 
8 hours for 3 days, then 1 g every 12 hours; CHILD up to 1 year, 125 mg 
every 8 hours for 3 days, then every 12 hours; CHILD 1–5 years, 250 mg; 
CHILD 5–10 years, 500 mg. 

Bacterial vaginosis, by mouth, ADULT, 2 g as a single dose or 400–500 mg twice 
daily for 5–7 days. 

Pelvic inflammatory disease, by mouth, ADULT, 400–500 mg twice daily for 
14 days. 

Leg ulcers and pressure sores, by mouth, ADULT 400 mg every 8 hours for 7 days. 
Acute ulcerative gingivitis, by mouth, ADULT, 200–250 mg every 8 hours for 
3 days; CHILD 1–3 years, 50 mg every 8 hours for 3 days; CHILD 3–7 years, 
100 mg every 12 hours for 3 days; CHILD 7–10 years, 100 mg every 8 hours 
for 3 days. 

Acute oral infections, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg every 8 hours for 3–7 days; 
CHILD 1–3 years, 50 mg every 8 hours for 3–7 days; CHILD 3–7 years, 
100 mg every 12 hours for 3-7 days; CHILD 7–10 years, 100 mg every 8 
hours for 3-7 days. 

Antibiotic-associated colitis, by mouth, ADULT, 800 mg initially, then 400 mg 
3 times daily for 10 days. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 123 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Surgical prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 400–500 mg 2 hours before surgery; up 
to 3 further doses of 400–500 mg may be given every 8 hours for high-risk 
procedures; CHILD, 7.5 mg/kg 2 hours before surgery; up to 3 further doses 
of 7.5 mg/kg may be given every 8 hours for high-risk procedures. 

Surgical prophylaxis, by rectum, ADULT, 1 g 2 hours before surgery; up to 
3 further doses of 1 g may be given every 8 hours for high-risk procedures; 
CHILD 5–10 years, 500 mg 2 hours before surgery; up to 3 further doses of 
500 mg may be given every 8 hours for high-risk procedures. 

Surgical prophylaxis by intravenous infusion (if rectal administration inappropriate), 
ADULT, 500 mg at induction; up to 3 further doses of 500 mg may be given 
every 8 hours for high-risk procedures; CHILD, 7.5 mg/kg at induction; up 
to 3 further doses of 7.5 mg/kg may be given every 8 hours for high-risk 
procedures.   

PATIENT ADVICE. Tablets should be swallowed whole with water, with or after 
food; suspension best taken one hour before food (or on an empty stomach).  

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, unpleasant metallic taste, furred tongue, 
and gastrointestinal disturbances; rarely headache, drowsiness, dizziness, 
ataxia, darkening of urine, erythema multiforme, pruritus, urticaria, 
angioedema, and anaphylaxis; abnormal liver function tests, hepatitis, 
jaundice, thrombocytopenia, aplastic anaemia, myalgia, arthralgia; peripheral 
neuropathy, epileptiform seizures, and leukopenia on prolonged or high 
dosage regimens. 

Nitrofurantoin 
Tablet: 100 mg. 

Nitrofurantoin is bactericidal in vitro to most Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
urinary tract pathogens and it is used to treat acute and recurrent urinary tract infections. 
It is also used prophylactically in chronic urinary tract infections.   

Uses: urinary tract infections. 
Contraindications: impaired renal function (Appendix 4); infants less than 
3 months; G6PD-deficiency including breastfeeding of affected infants 
(Appendix 3); pregnancy at term (Appendix 2); porphyria. 

Precautions: pulmonary disorders; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); monitor 
lung and liver function on long-term therapy (discontinue if lung function 
deteriorates); neurological or allergic disorders; anaemia; diabetes mellitus; 
the elderly and debilitated; vitamin B and folate deficiency; use may result in 
false positive urinary glucose (if testing for reducing substances); urine may 
be coloured yellow or brown. 

124 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
Acute uncomplicated urinary tract infections, by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg every 
12 hours or 50 mg every 6 hours, with food for 7 days; CHILD over 
3 months, 3 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses. 

Severe recurrent urinary tract infection, by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg every 6 hours 
with food for 7 days (reduced to 200 mg daily in divided doses if severe 
nausea). 

Prophylaxis of chronic urinary tract infections, by mouth, ADULT, 50–100 mg at 
night; CHILD over 3 months, 1 mg/kg at night (with regular monitoring of 
lung and liver function). 

Adverse effects: dose-related gastrointestinal disorders; nausea; hyper-
sensitivity reactions including urticaria, rash, sialadenitis, pruritus, and 
angioedema; anaphylaxis reported; rarely, cholestatic jaundice, hepatitis, and 
exfoliative dermatitis; erythema multiforme, pancreatitis, arthralgia; blood 
disorders; pulmonary reactions (including pulmonary fibrosis; possible 
association with lupus erythematosus-like syndrome); peripheral neuropathy; 
benign intracranial hypertension; transient alopecia. 

Spectinomycin 
Powder for injection: 2 g (as hydrochloride) in vial. 

Spectinomycin is active against Gram-negative organisms including Neiserria gonorrhoea. 
It is not suitable for the treatment of syphilis and patients being treated for gonorrhoea 
should be observed for evidence of syphilis. It should be used only when alternative 
therapies are inappropriate.  

Uses: uncomplicated and disseminated gonorrhoea; adult and neonatal 
gonococcal conjunctivitis; chancroid. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Dose:  
Uncomplicated gonococcal infections and chancroid, by deep intramuscular 
injection, ADULT, 2 g as a single dose; increased to 4 g as a single dose divided 
between 2 injection sites in difficult to treat cases and where there is known 
antibiotic resistance. 

Disseminated gonococcal infections, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 2 g 
twice daily for 7 days. 

Neonatal gonococcal conjunctivitis, by deep intramuscular injection, NEONATE, 
25 mg/kg (maximum, 75 mg) as a single dose. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 125 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: nausea, headache, dizziness, fever, chills, insomnia, urticaria; 
rarely, anaphylaxis; pain at injection site. 

Sulfadiazine 
Injection: 250 mg (sodium salt) in 4-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 500 mg. 

The usefulness of sulfonamides is limited by an increasing incidence of bacterial 
resistance. For many indications, they have been replaced by antibiotics that are more 
active and safer. Sulfadiazine is, however, still used in the prevention of rheumatic fever 
recurrence. 

Sulfadiazine is a complementary list antibacterial medicine. 

Uses: prevention of recurrences of rheumatic fever; toxoplasmosis 
(section 6.5.4)  

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfonamides; porphyria 
Precautions: hepatic impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 5); renal 
impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 4); maintain adequate fluid intake (to 
avoid crystalluria); blood disorders (avoid unless under specialist 
supervision; monitor blood counts and discontinue immediately if blood 
disorder develops); rash (discontinue immediately); predisposition to folate 
deficiency; the elderly; asthma; G6PD deficiency; pregnancy (Appendix 2) 
and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid in infants under 6 weeks; 
interactions: Appendix 1.  

Dose:  

Prevention of recurrences of rheumatic fever, by mouth, ADULT, 1 g daily; 
CHILD, 500 mg daily. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache; hypersensitivity 
reactions including rash, pruritus, photosensitivity reactions, exfoliative 
dermatitis, and erythema nodosum; rarely erythema multiforme (Stevens-
Johnson syndrome) and toxic epidermal necrolysis; systemic lupus 
erythematosus, myocarditis, serum sickness; crystalluria — resulting in 
haematuria, oliguria, and anuria; blood disorders including granulocytopenia, 
agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, and purpura (discontinue immediately); 
liver damage, pancreatitis, antibiotic-associated colitis, eosinophilia, cough 
and shortness of breath, pulmonary infiltrates, aseptic meningitis, 
depression, convulsions, ataxia, tinnitus, vertigo, dizziness, hallucinations, 
and electrolyte disturbances also reported. 

 
 

126 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim 
Injection: 80 mg + 16 mg/ml in 5-ml and 10-ml ampoules.  
Oral liquid: 200 mg + 40 mg/5 ml.  
Tablet: 100 mg + 20 mg; 400 mg + 80 mg. 

Also known as Co-trimoxazole. 

Sulfamethoxazole is used in combination with trimethoprim because of their synergistic 
activity. In some countries, indications for the use of this combination have been 
restricted. The treatment of Pneumocystis carinii (Pneumocystis jiroveci) infections must only 
be undertaken with specialist supervision where there are appropriate monitoring 
facilities (section 6.5.4).    

Uses: urinary tract infections; respiratory tract infections including bronchitis, 
pneumonia, and infections in cystic fibrosis; typhoid fever; melioidosis; 
listeriosis; brucellosis; granuloma inguinale; neonatal chlamydial 
conjunctivitis; otitis media; skin infections, animal bites; Pneumocystis carinii 
(Pneumocystis jiroveci) pneumonia (section 6.5.4). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfonamides or trimethoprim; 
porphyria. 

Precautions: renal impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 5); maintain adequate fluid intake (to 
avoid crystalluria); blood disorders (avoid unless under specialist 
supervision; monitor blood counts and discontinue immediately if blood 
disorder develops); rash (discontinue immediately); predisposition to folate 
deficiency or hyperkalaemia, the elderly; asthma; G6PD deficiency; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid in infants 
under 6 weeks; interactions: Appendix 1.  

Dose:  
Infections due to susceptible organisms (which are not susceptible to other 
antibacterials),  

by mouth, ADULT, sulfamethoxazole 800 mg + trimethoprim 160 mg every 
12 hours, increased to sulfamethoxazole 1.2 g + trimethoprim 240 mg every 
12 hours in more severe infections; CHILD 6 weeks–5 months, 
sulfamethoxazole 100 mg + trimethoprim 20 mg every 12 hours; CHILD 
6 months–5 years, sulfamethoxazole 200 mg + trimethoprim 40 mg every 
12 hours; CHILD 6–12 years, sulfamethoxazole 400 mg + trimethoprim 
80 mg every 12 hours;  

by intravenous infusion, ADULT, sulfamethoxazole 800 mg + trimethoprim 160 mg 
every 12 hours, increased to sulfamethoxazole 1.2 g + trimethoprim 240 mg, 
every 12 hours in more severe infections; CHILD, sulfamethoxazole 
30 mg/kg daily + trimethoprim 6 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses.  

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 127 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: nausea, diarrhoea; headache; hyperkalaemia; hypersensitivity 
reactions including rash and very rarely, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic 
epidermal necrolysis, and photosensitivity (discontinue immediately); less 
commonly vomiting; very rarely glossitis, stomatitis, anorexia, liver damage 
(including jaundice and hepatic necrosis), pancreatitis, antibiotic-associated 
colitis, myocarditis, cough and shortness of breath, pulmonary infiltrates, 
aseptic meningitis, depression, convulsions, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, 
tinnitus, vertigo, hallucinations, hypoglycaemia, blood disorders (including 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, megaloblastic anaemia, and eosinophilia), 
hyponatraemia, renal disorders (including interstitial nephritis), arthralgia, 
myalgia, vasculitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. 

Trimethoprim 
Tablet: 100 mg; 200 mg. 

Trimethoprim is also used alone for respiratory tract infections, in particular for 
bronchitis, and for urinary tract infections.   

Uses: urinary tract infections; bronchitis. 
Contraindications: blood disorders; porphyria. 
Precautions: renal impairment (avoid if severe, Appendix 4); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); predisposition to folate 
deficiency; the elderly; monitor blood counts on long-term therapy (but 
practical value not proven); neonates (specialist supervision required); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Acute infections, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg every 12 hours; CHILD  
6 weeks–5 months, 25 mg twice daily; CHILD 6 months–5 years, 50 mg 
twice daily; CHILD 6–12 years, 100 mg twice daily. 

Acute infections, by slow intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 
200 mg every 12 hours; CHILD under 12 years, 8 mg/kg daily in 2–3 divided 
doses. 

Chronic infections and prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg at night; CHILD, 
1–2 mg/kg at night. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: rash, pruritus; depression of haematopoiesis; gastrointestinal 
disturbances including nausea and vomiting; hyperkalaemia; rarely erythema 
multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis; photosensitivity and other 
allergic reactions including angioedema and anaphylaxis; aseptic meningitis. 

 

128 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Vancomycin 
Powder for injection: 250 mg (as hydrochloride) in vial. 

Vancomycin is not significantly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and must be 
given intravenously for systemic infections which cannot be treated with other effective, 
less toxic antimicrobials. It is used to treat serious infections due to Gram-positive 
cocci including meticillin-resistant staphylococcal infections, brain abscess, meningitis, 
and septicaemia and should be used in a hospital setting only. 

Vancomycin is a complementary list antibacterial medicine for use only when there is 
significant resistance to other medicines on the WHO Model List. 

Uses: meticillin-resistant staphylococcal pneumonia; septicaemia related to 
vascular catheter; meningitis; antibiotic-associated colitis; endocarditis 
prophylaxis (with gentamicin). 

Precautions: avoid rapid infusion (risk of anaphylactoid reactions, see Adverse 
effects); rotate infusion sites; renal impairment (Appendix 4); the elderly; 
history of deafness (avoid); monitor plasma vancomycin concentration after 
3 or 4 doses (earlier in the elderly and in renal impairment), blood counts, 
urine, and renal function; monitor auditory function in the elderly or in 
renal impairment; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Serious staphylococcal infections, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 500 mg over at 
least 60 minutes every 6 hours or 1 g over at least 100 minutes every 
12 hours; ELDERLY (over 65 years), 500 mg every 12 hours or 1 g once daily; 
NEONATE up to 1 week, 15 mg/kg initially, then 10 mg/kg every 12 hours; 
NEONATE 1–4 weeks, 15 mg/kg initially, then 10 mg/kg every 8 hours; 
CHILD over 1 month, 10 mg/kg every 6 hours. 

Antibiotic-associated colitis, by mouth, ADULT, 125–500 mg every 6 hours for 
7–10 days; CHILD 1 month–5 years, 5 mg/kg every 6 hours; CHILD over 
5 years, 62.5 mg every 6 hours. 

NOTE. Injection can be used to prepare a solution for oral administration. 

Endocarditis prophylaxis (for procedures under general anaesthetic), by 
intravenous infusion, ADULT, 1 g over at least 100 minutes, then gentamicin 
120 mg at induction or 15 minutes before procedure. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to the manufacturer’s 
directions. 

NOTE. Peak plasma concentration (measured 2 hours after infusion) should not 
exceed 30 mg/litre; pre-dose (trough) concentration should not exceed 5–10 mg/litre 
(10–15 mg/litre in endocarditis). 

Adverse effects: nephrotoxicity including renal failure and interstitial nephritis; 
ototoxicity (discontinue if tinnitus occurs); blood disorders; nausea, chills, 
fever, eosinophilia, anaphylaxis, rash, including exfoliative dermatitis, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 129 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome), toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, and vasculitis; phlebitis; severe hypotension (with shock and 
cardiac arrest), wheezing, dyspnoea, urticaria, pruritus, flushing of the upper 
body (‘red man’ syndrome), pain, and muscle spasm of the back and chest 
on rapid infusion.  

6.2.3 Antileprosy medicines 

Leprosy is a chronic mycobacterial infection due to Mycobacterium leprae, which 
is a slow-growing intracellular bacillus that infiltrates the skin, peripheral 
nerves, the nasal and other mucosa, and the eyes; it affects people of all ages 
and both sexes. The incubation period between infection and appearance of 
leprosy is normally between 2 and 10 years, but may be up to 20 years. It is 
transmitted from person-to-person when bacilli are shed from the nose; most 
individuals have natural immunity and symptoms are suppressed. For 
treatment purposes, patients may be classified as having either paucibacillary 
(PB) or multibacillary (MB) leprosy. The two forms may be distinguished by 
skin smears, but facilities are not always available to process them and their 
reliability is often doubtful. In practice, most leprosy programmes classify and 
choose a regimen based on the number of skin lesions; these are: PB leprosy, 
1–5 skin lesions and MB leprosy, more than 5 skin lesions.  
Medicines used in the treatment of leprosy should always be used in 
combination; this is essential to prevent the emergence of resistance. 
Rifampicin is now combined with dapsone to treat PB leprosy, and rifampicin 
and clofazimine are now combined with dapsone to treat MB leprosy. The 
WHO Programme for the Elimination of Leprosy currently provides, free of 
charge, oral multidrug therapy in colour-coded blister packs (MDT blister 
packs) to improve patients’ adherence to treatment. Any patient with a positive 
skin smear should be treated with the oral multidrug therapy (MDT) regimen 
for MB leprosy. The regimen for PB leprosy should never be given to a patient 
with MB leprosy. If diagnosis classification in a particular patient is not 
possible, then the MDT regimen for MB leprosy must be used.  
Lepra reactions are episodes of sudden increase in the activity of leprosy and 
are often accompanied by neuritis; reactions must always be treated promptly 
to prevent permanent nerve damage and disability. Leprosy multidrug therapy 
should continue during a lepra reaction without interruption. This reduces the 
frequency and severity of lepra reactions.  
Type 1 lepra reactions, or reversal reactions, are delayed hypersensitivity 
reactions and may occur in either PB or MB leprosy. If there is no nerve 
damage, type 1 reactions may be treated with analgesics such as acetylsalicylic 

130 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

acid or paracetamol (section 2.1). If there is nerve involvement, corticosteroids 
such as oral prednisolone (section 3) should be used in addition to analgesics.  
The type 2 lepra reaction, also known as erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL), 
is an antibody response to dead leprosy bacteria and occurs only in MB leprosy. 
Therapy for type 2 reactions may include analgesics, such as acetylsalicylic acid 
or paracetamol, and a corticosteroid, such as oral prednisolone. In patients not 
responding to a corticosteroid, clofazimine may be used. Severe type 2 lepra 
reactions should be treated under medical supervision in hospital.  
If a patient does not respond to lepra reaction treatment within 6 weeks or 
their condition worsen, the patient must be sent immediately to the nearest 
specialist centre. Neuritis may occur during, or independently of, lepra 
reactions. It can be successfully treated with a 12-week course of oral 
prednisolone (section 18.1); if patients do not respond, specialist centre 
treatment is required.  

Treatment regimens 

The recommended regimen for paucibacillary leprosy in adults (50–70 kg) is 
rifampicin, 600 mg once monthly and dapsone, 100 mg daily. Children aged 
10–14 years may be given rifampicin, 450 mg once monthly and dapsone, 
50 mg daily. Appropriate dose adjustments are required for younger children. 
For example, dapsone, 25 mg daily and rifampicin, 300 mg once a month. In 
PB leprosy, treatment is continued for 6 months. 
The recommended regimen for multibacillary (MB) leprosy in adults (50–70 kg) 
is rifampicin, 600 mg and clofazimine, 300 mg, both given once a month 
together with clofazimine, 50 mg and dapsone, 100 mg, both daily. Children 
aged 10–14 years may be given rifampicin, 450 mg and clofazimine, 150 mg, 
both once a month together with clofazimine, 50 mg every other day and 
dapsone, 50 mg daily. Appropriate dosage adjustments are required for 
younger children. For example, dapsone, 25 mg daily, clofazimine, 50 mg twice 
a week, and clofazimine, 100 mg and rifampicin, 300 mg once a month. In MB 
leprosy treatment is continued for 12 months.  
For patients who cannot take rifampicin because of allergy, other diseases, or 
rifampicin-resistant leprosy, and for patients who refuse to take clofazimine, 
there are alternative regimens which incorporate ofloxacin and minocycline 
[not included on the 15th WHO Model List]. 
 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 131 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Clofazimine 
Capsule: 50 mg; 100 mg. 

Uses: multibacillary (MB) leprosy; type 2 lepra reactions. 
Precautions: pre-existing gastrointestinal symptoms (reduce dose; increase 
dose interval or discontinue if symptoms develop during treatment); liver 
and renal impairment; pregnancy (Appendix 2); and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); may discolour soft contact lenses. 

Dose:  
Multibacillary leprosy (in combination with dapsone and rifampicin; see also 
introductory note above), by mouth, ADULT, 50 mg once daily and 300 mg 
once a month; CHILD 10–14 years, 50 mg on alternate days and 150 mg 
once a month; CHILD under 10 years, see introductory note above; continue 
treatment for 12 months. 

Type 2 lepra reaction (erythema nodosum leprosum), by mouth, ADULT and 
CHILD, 200–300 mg daily in 2 or 3 divided doses for a maximum of 
3 months; 4–6 weeks treatment may be required before any effect is seen. 

Adverse effects: reversible discoloration of skin, hair, cornea, conjunctiva, 
tears, sweat, sputum, faeces, and urine; dose-related gastrointestinal 
symptoms including pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, weight loss, and 
gastrointestinal bleeding; severe mucosal and submucosal oedema, with 
prolonged treatment with high doses (may be severe enough to cause 
subacute small-bowel obstruction; see also Precautions); dry skin, acne-like 
eruptions, rash, pruritus, photosensitivity reactions, decreased sweat 
production; dry eyes; rarely headache, drowsiness, dizziness, taste disorders, 
and elevation of blood glucose concentration. 

Dapsone 
Tablet: 25 mg; 50 mg; 100 mg. 

Uses: paucibacillary (PB) and multibacillary (MB) leprosy. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfones; severe anaemia. 
Precautions: anaemia (treat severe anaemia before commencement of therapy 
and monitor blood counts during treatment); susceptibility to haemolysis 
including G6PD deficiency (including breastfeeding affected infants); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); porphyria; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

BLOOD DISORDERS. On long-term treatment patients and their carers should be 
told how to recognize blood disorders and advised to seek immediate medical attention 
if symptoms such as fever, sore throat, rash, mouth ulcers, purpura, bruising, or 
bleeding develop. 

132 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
Paucibacillary leprosy (in combination with rifampicin; see also introductory 
note above), by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg daily; CHILD under 10 years, see 
introductory note above; CHILD 10–14 years, 50 mg daily, see introductory 
note above; continue treatment for 6 months. 

Multibacillary leprosy (in combination with rifampicin and clofazimine, see 
note above), ADULT, 100 mg daily; CHILD under 10 years, see also 
introductory note above; CHILD 10–14 years, 50 mg daily, see introductory 
note above; continue treatment for 12 months. 

Adverse effects: haemolysis and methaemoglobinaemia; allergic dermatitis 
(rarely including toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome); 
rarely hepatitis and agranulocytosis; ‘dapsone syndrome’ resembling 
mononucleosis (a rare hypersensitivity reaction with symptoms including 
rash, fever, jaundice, and eosinophilia); gastrointestinal irritation; 
tachycardia, headache, nervousness, insomnia, blurred vision, paraesthesia, 
reversible peripheral neuropathy, and psychoses reported. 

Rifampicin 
Capsule or tablet: 150 mg; 300 mg. 

Uses: paucibacillary leprosy (PB); multibacillary leprosy (MB); meningitis; 
tuberculosis (section 6.2.4). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to rifampicin; jaundice. 
Precautions: hepatic impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 5); monitor liver 
function and blood counts in liver disorders, alcohol dependency, the 
elderly, and in those on prolonged therapy; renal impairment (if dose above 
600 mg daily; Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); porphyria; discolours soft contact lenses; important: advise 
patients on oral contraceptives to use additional means; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Resumption of rifampicin treatment after a long interval may cause serious 
immunological reactions, resulting in renal impairment, haemolysis, or 
thrombocytopenia; discontinue permanently if serious adverse effects occur. 

LIVER DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs of 
liver disorders and advised to discontinue treatment and seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms such as persistent nausea, vomiting, malaise, or jaundice develop. 
Dose:  
Paucibacillary leprosy (in combination with dapsone; see also introductory 
note above), by mouth, ADULT, 600 mg once a month; CHILD 10–14 years, 
450 mg once a month; CHILD under 10 years, see introductory note above; 
continue treatment for 6 months. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 133 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Multibacillary leprosy (in combination with dapsone and clofazimine; see note 
above), by mouth, ADULT, 600 mg once a month under supervision; CHILD 
under 10 years, see note above; CHILD 10–14 years, 450 mg once a month 
under supervision; continue treatment for 12 months. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Take dose at least 30 minutes before a meal, since absorption is 
reduced by food. 

Adverse effects: severe gastrointestinal disturbances including anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhoea (antibiotic-associated colitis reported); headache, 
drowsiness; rash, fever, influenza-like syndrome and respiratory symptoms, 
collapse, shock, haemolytic anaemia, acute renal failure, and 
thrombocytopenic purpura (more frequent with intermittent therapy); 
alterations of liver function) jaundice, and potentially fatal hepatitis (dose-
related; do not exceed maximum daily dose of 600 mg); oedema, muscular 
weakness and myopathy, exfoliative dermatitis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
pemphigoid reactions, leukopenia, eosinophilia, and menstrual disturbances 
also reported; urine, tears, saliva, and sputum coloured orange-red. 

6.2.4 Antituberculosis medicines 

Tuberculosis is a chronic infectious disease caused primarily by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis or sometimes M. bovis. Infection is usually due to inhalation of 
infected droplet nuclei with the lung generally being the first organ affected. 
The primary infection is usually asymptomatic, and infection and inflammatory 
responses resolve with the development of acquired immunity. Surviving 
bacteria may become dormant, or in susceptible patients, progress to active 
primary disease; dormant organisms may later produce disease and this often 
occurs if immune status is altered.   
Tuberculosis is the most prevalent infectious disease of adults and causes 26% 
of avoidable adult deaths in the developing world. More than 80% of 
tuberculosis cases are pulmonary (PTB). At least 30% of patients who are 
infected with HIV will also develop active tuberculosis.  
The increase in resistant strains and poor compliance has led to the 
development of new, simplified drug regimens for the treatment of TB. 
Directly observed treatment, short-course (DOTS) therapy, which lasts for 
6 or 8 months and is administered under direct observation, is one of the most 
important components of the WHO strategy against tuberculosis. Simplified 
drug regimens and intermittent therapy have been introduced to improve 
compliance. WHO does not generally recommend twice weekly regimens. If a 
patient receiving a twice weekly regimen misses a dose of tablets, the missed 
dose represents a bigger fraction of the total number of treatment doses than if 

134 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

the patient was receiving a 3 times weekly or daily dose regimen. Therefore, 
there is a greater risk of treatment failure with twice weekly regimens. Fixed-
dose combination tablets incorporating two or more drugs are used to 
improve compliance and decrease medication errors; they should be used 
unless one of the components cannot be given because of resistance or 
intolerance.    
The modern short-course therapy is usually in two phases. The initial phase 
(2 months) involves the concurrent use of at least 3 drugs to reduce the 
bacterial population rapidly and prevent drug-resistant bacteria emerging. The 
second continuation phase (4–6 months) involves fewer drugs and is intended 
to eliminate any remaining bacteria and prevent recurrence. Direct observation 
of therapy is considered essential to ensure compliance in the initial phase and 
is also useful in the continuation phase, especially if patients are receiving 
rifampicin. Five antituberculosis drugs, isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, 
streptomycin, (which are bactericidal) and ethambutol (which is bacteriostatic) 
are used in various combinations as part of WHO-recommended treatment 
regimens. In supervised regimens, a change of drug regimen should be 
considered only if the patient fails to respond after 5 months of DOTS.   
Isoniazid, rifampicin, and pyrazinamide are components of all antituberculosis 
drug regimens currently recommended by WHO. Unsupervised and alternative 
regimens as set out in the following tables may be administered as specified.   
Additional reserve antituberculosis drugs (amikacin, p-aminosalicylic acid, 
capreomycin, cycloserine, ethionamide, kanamycin, ofloxacin, or levofloxacin) 
for the treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis should be used in 
specialized centres adhering to WHO standards for TB control. 

Prophylaxis 

Worldwide, an important predisposing cause of immunosuppression leading to 
tuberculosis is HIV infection; it increases susceptibility to primary infection 
and  increases the reactivation rate of tuberculosis. Preventative 
antituberculosis therapy of such persons is recommended.    
Chemoprophylaxis with isoniazid can prevent the development of clinically 
apparent disease in persons in close contact with infectious patients, and also 
prevent the reactivation of previously dormant disease in other persons at high 
risk particularly those who are immunodeficient.    
Where the disease remains highly prevalent, routine immunization of infants 
within the first year of age with BCG vaccine is a cost-effective prophylactic 
measure . However, there is no evidence that BCG will protect children older 
than 15 years of age. Infants born to HIV-positive mothers should be 
vaccinated during the first year of life, provided they have no clinical signs 
suggestive of HIV (see also section 19.3).    

WHO Model Formulary 2008 135 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Diagnosis 

The tuberculin test has limited diagnostic value. A positive tuberculin test 
indicates previous exposure to mycobacterial antigens through infection with 
one of the tubercle bacilli, or BCG vaccination. The tuberculin test does not 
distinguish between tuberculosis and other mycobacterial infection, between 
active and quiescent disease, or between acquired infection and seroconversion 
induced by BCG vaccination (see also section 19.1). 
Recommended 6-month treatment regimens for tuberculosisa 

Medicine Initial phase Continuation phase 
(2 months) (4 months) 

Isoniazid 5 mg/kg daily  5 mg/kg daily  
+ 
Rifampicin 10 mg/kg daily  10 mg/kg daily  
+ 
Pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg daily    
together with      
Streptomycinb 15 mg/kg daily    
or      
Ethambutol 15 mg/kg dailyc   
 
Isoniazid 10 mg/kg 3 times weekly  10 mg/kg 3 times weekly 
+ 
Rifampicin 10 mg/kg 3 times weekly 10 mg/kg 3 times weekly 
+ 
Pyrazinamide 35 mg/kg 3 times weekly   
together with      
Streptomycinb 15 mg/kg 3 times weekly   
or      
Ethambutol 30 mg/kg 3 times weekly   
 

  
Recommended 8-month treatment regimen for tuberculosisa 

Medicine Initial phase Continuation phase 
(2 months) (6 months) 

Isoniazid 5 mg/kg daily  5 mg/kg daily  
+ 
Rifampicin 10 mg/kg daily   
+ 
Pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg daily    
together with      
Streptomycinb 15 mg/kg daily    
or      
Ethambutol 15 mg/kg dailyc  15 mg/kg daily 
 

  
aUnless otherwise indicated, doses are suitable for both adults and children. 
bStreptomycin always replaces ethambutol in meningeal TB.  
cEthambutol 20 mg/kg recommended in children. 

 
Category I: New pulmonary disease (smear-positive or smear-negative with 
extensive involvement of parenchyma), concomitant severe HIV disease, and 
new severe extra-pulmonary disease 

1
Initial phase  (antibacterials administered daily or 3 times weekly2): 
isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide + ethambutol (or streptomycin) for 
2 months. 

136 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

1
Continuation phase  (antibacterials administered daily or 3 times weekly): 
isoniazid + rifampicin for 4 months (or isoniazid + ethambutol for 6 months 
but less effective than isoniazid + rifampicin). 
 
Category II: Previously treated smear-positive pulmonary disease which has 
relapsed, or failed3 to respond, or if treatment was interrupted 

1
Initial phase  (antibacterials administered daily or 3 times weekly): 
isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide + ethambutol + streptomycin for 
2 months. 
then: 
isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide + ethambutol for 1 month. 

1
Continuation phase  (antibacterials administered daily or 3 times weekly): 
isoniazid + rifampicin + ethambutol for 5 months. 
 
Category III: New smear-negative pulmonary disease (other than in 
Category I) and less severe extra-pulmonary disease 

1
Initial phase  (antibacterials administered daily or 3 times weekly2): 
isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide + ethambutol4 for 2 months. 

1 
Continuation phase (antibacterials administered daily or 3 times weekly): 
isoniazid + rifampicin for 4 months (or isoniazid + ethambutol for 6 months 
but less effective than isoniazid + rifampicin) 
 
Category IV: Chronic and multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) (smear-
positive despite supervised re-treatment)5 
specially designed standardized or individualized regimens recommended 

Amikacin 
Powder for injection: 1000 mg in vial. 

Amikacin is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to WHO standards 
for tuberculosis control. 

Capreomycin 
Powder for injection: 1000 mg in vial. 

Capreomycin is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to WHO standards 
for tuberculosis control. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 137 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Cycloserine 
Capsule or tablet: 250 mg. 

Cycloserine is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to WHO standards 
for tuberculosis control. 

Ethambutol 
Tablet: 100-400 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: optic neuritis; children under 5 years (unable to report 
symptomatic visual disturbances); severe renal impairment. 

Precautions: ocular examination recommended before and during treatment 
(see also note below); renal impairment (reduce dose and monitor plasma 
ethambutol concentration if creatinine clearance is less than 30 ml/minute; 
Appendix 4); the elderly; pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3). 

NOTE. Patients should report visual disturbances immediately and discontinue 
treatment; children who are incapable of reporting symptomatic visual changes 
accurately should be given alternative therapy, as should, if possible, any patient who 
cannot understand warnings about visual adverse effects. 
Dose:  
Tuberculosis (as part of a 6- or 8-month regimen; see introductory note and 
tables above), by mouth, ADULT, 15 mg/kg daily or 30 mg/kg 3 times weekly; 
CHILD, 20 mg/kg daily or 30 mg/kg 3 times a week. 

NOTE. Peak plasma concentration (measured 2–2.5 hours after dose) should be in the 
range 2–6 mg/litre (7–22 micromol/litre); trough (pre-dose) concentration should be 
less than 1 mg/litre (4 micromol/litre). 

Adverse effects: optic neuritis including reduced visual acuity and red/green 
colour blindness (early changes usually reversible; prompt withdrawal may 
prevent blindness); peripheral neuritis (especially in legs); gout; rarely rash, 
pruritus, urticaria, and thrombocytopenia. 

Ethionamide 
Tablet: 125 mg; 250 mg. 

Ethionamide is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to WHO standards 
for tuberculosis control. 

138 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Isoniazid 
Tablet: 100-300 mg.  
Tablet (scored): 50 mg. 

Uses: tuberculosis treatment, in combination with other drugs (see notes and 
tables above); tuberculosis prophylaxis. 

Contraindications: drug-induced hepatic disease. 
Precautions: hepatic impairment (monitor hepatic function; Appendix 5); 
malnutrition, chronic alcohol dependence, chronic renal failure 
(Appendix 4), diabetes mellitus, and HIV infection (prophylactic pyridoxine, 
10 mg daily, required because of the increased risk of peripheral neuritis; see 
also section 27); epilepsy; slow acetylator status (increased risk of adverse 
effects); history of psychosis; pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

LIVER DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs of 
liver disorder, and advised to discontinue treatment and seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, malaise or jaundice develop. 
Dose:  
Tuberculosis, treatment (as part of a 6- or 8-month regimen; see introductory 
note and tables above), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 5 mg/kg (4–6 mg/kg) 
daily (maximum, 300 mg daily), or 10 mg/kg 3 times weekly. 

Tuberculosis, treatment in critically ill patients unable to take oral therapy (as 
part of a combination therapy), by intramuscular injection, ADULT, 200–300 mg 
as single daily dose; CHILD, 10–20 mg/kg daily. 

Tuberculosis, prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 300 mg daily for at least 6 months; 
CHILD, 5 mg/kg daily (maximum, 300 mg daily) for at least 6 months. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Isoniazid should be taken on an empty stomach; if taken with 
food to reduce gastrointestinal irritation, oral absorption and bioavailability may be 
impaired. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disorders including nausea and vomiting, 
diarrhoea and pain, constipation, and dry mouth; hypersensitivity reactions 
including fever, rash, joint pain, erythema multiforme, and purpura (usually 
during the first weeks of treatment); peripheral neuropathy; blood disorders 
including agranulocytosis, haemolytic anaemia, and aplastic anaemia; optic 
neuritis, toxic psychoses, and convulsions; hepatitis (especially in those over 
the age of 35 years and in regular users of alcohol; withdraw treatment); 
systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, pellagra, hyperreflexia, 
difficulty with micturition, hyperglycaemia, and gynaecomastia also reported. 

 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 139 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Isoniazid + ethambutol 
Tablet: 150 mg + 400 mg. 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: combined preparation not suitable for use in children; see 
also under Ethambutol and Isoniazid. 

Precautions: see under Ethambutol and Isoniazid. 
Dose:  

Tuberculosis (as part of an 8-month regimen; see introductory note and tables 
above), by mouth, ADULT, ethambutol, 800 mg and isoniazid, 300 mg daily 

Adverse effects: see under Ethambutol and Isoniazid. 

Kanamycin 
Powder for injection: 1000 mg in vial. 

Kanamycin is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to WHO standards 
for tuberculosis control. 

Ofloxacin 
Tablet: 200 mg; 400 mg. 

Ofloxacin (and levofloxacin) are complementary list medicines for the treatment of 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to 
WHO standards for tuberculosis control. 

p-aminosalicylic acid 
Granules: 4 g in sachet. 
Tablet: 500 mg. 

p-aminosalicylic acid is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of multidrug-
resistant tuberculosis which should be used in specialized centres adhering to WHO 
standards for tuberculosis control. 

Pyrazinamide 
Tablet: 400 mg.  
Tablet (dispersible): 150 mg.  
Tablet (scored): 150 mg. 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: severe hepatic impairment; porphyria. 

140 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (monitor hepatic function; Appendix 5); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); diabetes mellitus (monitor blood glucose — may 
change suddenly); gout; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3). 

LIVER DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs of 
liver disorder, and advised to discontinue treatment and seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms such as persistent nausea, vomiting, malaise or jaundice develop. 
Dose:  

Tuberculosis (as part of a 6- or 8-month regimen; see introductory note and 
tables above), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 25 mg/kg daily or 35 mg/kg 
3 times weekly. 

Adverse effects: hepatotoxicity including fever, anorexia, hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly, jaundice, and liver failure; nausea, vomiting; flushing; dysuria; 
arthralgia; gout; sideroblastic anaemia; rash, photosensitivity. 

Rifampicin 
Capsule or tablet: 150 mg; 300 mg. 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs; leprosy (section 6.2.3); 
meningitis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to rifamycins; jaundice. 
Precautions: hepatic impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 5); monitor liver 
function and blood counts in liver disorders, alcohol dependency, the 
elderly, and in those on prolonged therapy; renal impairment (if dose above 
600 mg daily; Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); porphyria; discolours soft contact lenses; important: advise 
patients on hormonal contraceptives to use additional means; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Resumption of rifampicin treatment after a long interval may cause serious 
immunological reactions, resulting in renal impairment, haemolysis, or 
thrombocytopenia — discontinue permanently if serious adverse effects occur. 

LIVER DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs of 
liver disorders and advised to discontinue treatment and seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms such as persistent nausea, vomiting, malaise, or jaundice develop. 
Dose:  

Tuberculosis (as part of a 6- or 8-month regimen; see introductory notes and 
tables above), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 10 mg/kg daily or 3 times weekly 
(maximum, 600 mg daily). 

PATIENT ADVICE. Take dose at least 30 minutes before a meal, as absorption is 
reduced when taken with food. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 141 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: severe gastrointestinal disturbances including anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhoea (antibiotic-associated colitis reported); headache, 
drowsiness; rash, fever, influenza-like syndrome and respiratory symptoms, 
collapse, shock, haemolytic anaemia, acute renal failure, and thrombo-
cytopenic purpura (more frequent with intermittent therapy); alterations of 
liver function, jaundice, and potentially fatal hepatitis (dose related; do not 
exceed maximum dose of 600 mg daily); oedema, muscular weakness and 
myopathy, exfoliative dermatitis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, pemphigoid 
reactions, leukopenia, eosinophilia, and menstrual disturbances also 
reported; urine, tears, saliva, and sputum coloured orange-red. 

Rifampicin + isoniazid 
Tablet: 
60 mg + 30 mg; 150 mg + 75 mg; 300 mg + 150 mg. 
60 mg + 60 mg (For intermittent use 3 times weekly). 
150 mg + 150 mg (For intermittent use 3 times weekly). 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: see under Isoniazid and Rifampicin. 
Precautions: combined preparation usually not suitable for use in children; see 
also under Isoniazid and Rifampicin. 

Dose:  

Tuberculosis (as part of a 6-month regimen; see introductory note and tables 
above), by mouth, ADULT, rifampicin, 10 mg/kg and isoniazid, 5 mg/kg daily. 

Tuberculosis (as part of a 6-month regimen; see introductory note and tables 
above), by mouth, ADULT, rifampicin, 10 mg/kg and isoniazid, 10 mg/kg, 
3 times weekly. 

Adverse effects: see under Isoniazid and Rifampicin. 

Rifampicin + isoniazid + ethambutol 
Tablet: 150 mg + 75 mg + 275 mg. 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: see under Isoniazid, Ethambutol, and Rifampicin. 
Precautions: combined preparation usually not suitable for use in children, see 
also under Isoniazid, Ethambutol, and Rifampicin.  

Dose:  
Tuberculosis (as part of an 8-month regimen; see introductory note and tables 
above), by mouth, ADULT, rifampicin, 10 mg/kg, isoniazid, 5 mg/kg, and 

142 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

ethambutol 15 mg/kg daily; or, rifampicin, 10 mg/kg, isoniazid, 10 mg/kg, 
and ethambutol, 30 mg/kg, 3 times a week; CHILD, rifampicin, 10 mg/kg, 
isoniazid, 5 mg/kg, and ethambutol, 20 mg/kg daily; alternatively rifampicin, 
10 mg/kg, isoniazid, 10 mg/kg, and ethambutol, 30 mg/kg 3 times a week. 

Adverse effects: see under Isoniazid, Ethambutol, and Rifampicin. 

Rifampicin + isoniazid + pyrazinamide 
Tablet: 
60 mg + 30 mg + 150 mg; 150 mg + 75 mg + 400 mg. 
150 mg + 150 mg + 500 mg (For intermittent use 3 times weekly). 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: combined preparation not suitable for use in children; see 
also under Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Rifampicin. 

Precautions: see under Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Rifampicin. 
Dose:  
Tuberculosis (as part of a 6-month regimen; see introductory note and tables 
above), by mouth, ADULT, rifampicin, 10 mg/kg, isoniazid, 5 mg/kg, and 
pyrazinamide, 25 mg/kg daily or rifampicin, 10 mg/kg, isoniazid, 10 mg/kg, 
and pyrazinamide, 35 mg/kg, 3 times weekly. 

Adverse effects: see under Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Rifampicin. 

Rifampicin + isoniazid + pyrazinamide + ethambutol 
Tablet: 150 mg + 75 mg + 400 mg + 275 mg. 

Uses: tuberculosis, alone or in combination with other drugs. 
Contraindications: combined preparation not suitable for use in children; see 
also under Ethambutol, Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Rifampicin. 

Precautions: see under Ethambutol, Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Rifampicin.  
Dose:  

Tuberculosis (as part of a 6-month regimen; see introductory note and tables 
above), by mouth, ADULT, rifampicin 10 mg/kg, isoniazid 5 mg/kg, 
pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg, and ethambutol 15 mg/kg daily. 

Adverse effects: see under Ethambutol, Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and 
Rifampicin.  

 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 143 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Streptomycin 
Powder for injection: 1 g (as sulfate) in vial. 

Uses: tuberculosis, in combination with other drugs; tularaemia; plague; 
brucellosis (with doxycycline; section 6.2.2). 

Contraindications: hearing disorders; myasthenia gravis; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2). 

Precautions: children (painful injection, avoid use if possible); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4), infants, and the elderly (adjust dose and monitor 
renal, auditory, and vestibular function, and plasma streptomycin 
concentrations); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Tuberculosis (as part of a 6- or 8-month regimen; see introductory note and 
tables above), by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 15 mg/kg 
daily or 3 times weekly (patients over 60 years or those weighing less than 
50 kg may not tolerate doses above 500–750 mg daily). 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

NOTE. One-hour (peak) plasma concentration should be 15–40 mg/litre; pre-dose 
(trough) concentration should be less than 5 mg/litre (less than 1 mg/litre in renal 
impairment or those over 50 years). 

Adverse effects: vestibular and auditory damage, nephrotoxicity; 
hypersensitivity reactions (withdraw treatment); paraesthesia of mouth; 
rarely hypomagnesaemia on prolonged therapy; antibiotic-associated colitis; 
also, nausea, vomiting, and rash; rarely haemolytic anaemia, aplastic anaemia, 
agranulocytosis, and thrombocytopenia; pain and abscess at injection site. 

6.3 Antifungal medicines 

Fungal infections can be superficial or systemic. Superficial infections affect 
only the skin, hair, nails or mucous membranes, whereas systemic fungal 
infections affect the body as a whole. 
Systemic fungal infections are sometimes caused by inhalation, ingestion or 
inoculation of primary pathogens, and sometimes by opportunistic invasion of 
commensals in patients with lowered host resistance. They are increasing in 
prevalence not only because of the pandemic of HIV infection, but also 
because of the rise in illicit intravenous drug use in many countries, and greater 
use of broad spectrum antibiotics and invasive medical procedures. In 
immunodeficient patients, systemic fungal infections are often disseminated. 

144 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Amphotericin B is a  lipophilic polyene antibiotic; it is fungistatic against a 
broad spectrum of pathogenic fungi, including Candida spp., Aspergillus spp., 
Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides 
immitis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, Mucor, Absidia, and Phicopes spp.; it is also 
active against algal Prototheca spp. and against the Leishmania protozoa. It is used 
for the empirical treatment of serious fungal infections and is used alone or in 
conjunction with flucytosine to treat cryptococcal meningitis and systemic 
candidosis.  
Amphotericin B has to be administered parenterally as there is little or no 
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract; amphotericin B can be nephrotoxic. 
Duration of therapy depends on the initial severity of the infection and the 
clinical response of the patient. In some infections, a satisfactory response is 
only obtained after several months of continuous treatment. Lipid 
formulations of amphotericin B for intravenous infusion [not included on the 
15th WHO Model List] are significantly less toxic, but are very much more 
expensive. 
Clotrimazole is an imidazole antifungal which is effective in short courses for 
the treatment of vaginal candidosis. Treatment involves insertion of pessaries 
(vaginal tablets) or cream high into the vagina (including during menstruation). 
Recurrent infection may be treated with a high-dose pessary every week for 
6 months. 
Fluconazole, an orally active synthetic imidazole derivative, possesses 
fungistatic activity against dermatophytes, yeasts, and other pathogenic fungi. 
It is widely used in the treatment of serious gastrointestinal and systemic 
mycoses, such as ringworm (see also section 13.1), as well as in the 
management of superficial infections. Fluconazole is also used to prevent 
fungal infections in immunocompromised patients.  
Flucytosine is a synthetic fluorinated pyrimidine with a narrow spectrum of 
antifungal activity, but which is particularly against Cryptococcus and Candida spp. 
In susceptible fungi, it is converted to fluorouracil by cytosine deaminase. 
Flucytosine is myelosuppressive and plasma concentrations above 
75 micrograms/ml are associated with myelotoxicity. 
Griseofulvin is a fungistatic antibiotic derived from Penicillium griseofulvum with 
selective activity against the dermatophytes causing ringworm, Microsporum canis, 
Trichophyton rubrum, and T. verrucosum (see also section 13.1). It has no activity 
against pityriasis versicolor or candida infections. Griseofulvin is deposited 
selectively in keratin precursor cells of skin, hair, and nails where it disrupts the 
mitotic apparatus of fungal cells thus preventing fungal invasion of newly-
formed cells. It is unsuitable for prophylactic use. Close attention should be 
given to hygiene and to possible reservoirs of reinfection in clothing, footwear, 
and bedding.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 145 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Nystatin, a polyene antifungal antibiotic derived from Streptomyces noursei, is 
effective against infections caused by a wide range of yeasts and yeast-like 
fungi. It is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and it is not 
absorbed from the skin or mucous membranes when applied topically. It is 
used for the treatment of candidosis, but is less effective for prevention or 
treatment of candidosis in immunocompromised patients. 
Potassium iodide aqueous oral solution is a clear liquid with a characteristic, 
strong salty taste. It is effective against sporotrichosis and subcutaneous 
phycomycosis, which are fungal infections caused by Sporothrix schenckii and 
Basidiobolus haptosporus, respectively. In subcutaneous sporotrichosis, 
amphotericin B is often effective in patients unable to tolerate iodides. 
Itraconazole [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], by mouth has been 
tried as an alternative to potassium iodide in both cutaneous and extra-
cutaneous sporotrichosis. In phycomycosis, fluconazole may be effective. 

Amphotericin B 
Powder for injection: 50 mg in vial. 

Amphotericin B is a complementary list antifungal medicine. 

Uses: life-threatening fungal infections including histoplasmosis, 
coccidioidomycosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, aspergillosis, 
cryptococcosis, mucormycosis, sporotrichosis, and candidosis; leishmaniasis 
(section 6.5.2). 

Precautions: initial test dose required (see note below); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); monitor hepatic and renal function; blood counts, and 
plasma electrolyte concentrations (including potassium and magnesium 
concentration); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
avoid rapid infusion (risk of arrhythmias); interactions: Appendix 1. 

ANAPHYLAXIS. Anaphylaxis rarely occurs with intravenous amphotericin B and a 
test dose is advisable before commencing the first infusion. The patient should be 
observed for about 30 minutes after the test dose.  
Dose:  
Systemic fungal infections, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, initial test 
dose, 1 mg over 20–30 minutes, followed by 250 micrograms/kg daily, 
gradually increased up to 1 mg/kg daily, or in severe infection, up to 
1.5 mg/kg daily or on alternate days. 

NOTE. Prolonged treatment is usually necessary; if treatment is interrupted for longer 
than 7 days, it should be recommenced at 250 micrograms/kg daily and increased 
gradually.  

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions.  

146 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: fever, headache, anorexia, weight loss, nausea and vomiting, 
malaise, diarrhoea, muscle and joint pain, dyspepsia, epigastric pain; renal 
function disturbances (including hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, and 
renal toxicity); blood disorders; cardiovascular toxicity (including 
arrhythmias); neurological disorders (including peripheral neuropathy); 
abnormal liver function (discontinue treatment); rash; anaphylactoid 
reactions (see note above); pain and thrombophlebitis at injection site. 

Clotrimazole 
Vaginal cream: 1%; 10%.  
Vaginal tablet: 100 mg; 500 mg. 

Uses: anogenital candidosis; ringworm (section 13.1). 
Precautions: damages latex condoms and diaphragms (advise patients to use 
alternative contraceptive precautions). 

Dose:  
Anogenital candidosis, ADULT, apply 1% cream to anogenital area 2–3 times 
daily. 

Vaginal candidosis, ADULT, vaginal administration, (10% vaginal cream), 5 g of as 
a single dose at night, repeated once if necessary. 

Vaginal candidosis, ADULT, vaginal administration (pessary), 100 mg at night for 
6 nights or 200 mg at night for 3 nights or 500 mg at night as a single dose. 

Adverse effects: local irritation. 

Fluconazole 
Capsule: 50 mg. 
Injection: 2 mg/ml in vial. 
Oral liquid: 50 mg/5 ml. 

Fluconazole is a representative imidazole antifungal. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: systemic mycoses including histoplasmosis, non-meningeal 
coccidioidomycosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, and blastomycosis; treatment 
and, in AIDS and other immunosuppressed patients, prophylaxis of 
cryptococcal meningitis; prevention of fungal infections in 
immunocompromised patients; oesophageal and oropharyngeal candidosis, 
vaginal candidosis and systemic candidosis; ringworm where topical 
treatment has failed). 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); monitor liver function (discontinue if signs or 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 147 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

symptoms of hepatic disease, especially hepatic necrosis; Appendix 5); 
susceptibility to QT interval prolongation; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Systemic mycoses, by mouth or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 200 mg daily for at 
least 6 months; CHILD over 2 years, 3–6 mg/kg daily for at least 6 months. 

Cryptococcal meningitis (following amphotericin B induction therapy), by 
mouth or by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 800 mg daily for 2 days, followed by 
400 mg daily for 8 weeks; CHILD, 6–12 mg/kg daily for 8 weeks (every 72 
hours in NEONATE up to 2 weeks old, or every 48 hours in NEONATE 2–4 
weeks old).  

Prevention of relapse of cryptococcal meningitis in AIDS patients after 
completion of primary therapy, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg daily or by 
intravenous infusion, ADULT, 100–200 mg daily. 

Systemic candidosis (in patients unable to tolerate amphotericin B), by mouth or 
by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 400 mg as an initial dose, then 200 mg daily for 
at least 4 weeks; CHILD, 6–12 mg/kg daily (every 72 hours in NEONATE up 
to 2 weeks old, or every 48 hours in NEONATE 2–4 weeks old). 

Oesophageal and oropharyngeal candidosis, by mouth or by intravenous infusion, 
ADULT, 200 mg as an initial dose, then 100 mg daily until symptoms 
resolved; up to 400 mg daily in very resistant infections; CHILD, 3–6 mg/kg 
on the first day, followed by 3 mg/kg daily (every 72 hours in NEONATE up 
to 2 weeks old, or every 48 hours in NEONATE 2–4 weeks old). 

Vaginal candidosis, by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg as a single dose. 
Prevention of fungal infections in immunocompromised patients, by mouth or 
by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 50–400 mg daily adjusted according to risk; 
commence treatment before anticipated onset of neutropenia and continue 
for 7 days after neutrophil count is in desirable range; CHILD, 3–12 mg/kg 
daily according to extent and duration of neutropenia (every 72 hours in 
NEONATE up to 2 weeks old, or every 48 hours in NEONATE 2–4 weeks old); 
maximum, 400 mg daily. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, flatulence, 
diarrhoea; headache, taste disturbances, hepatic disorders, dizziness, 
seizures, alopecia, pruritus; rash (withdraw treatment); angioedema, 
anaphylaxis, bullous lesions, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and erythema 
multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) reported (severe skin reactions 
more common in AIDS); hyperlipidaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
hypokalaemia. 

 
 

148 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Flucytosine 
Capsule: 250 mg. 
Infusion: 2.5 g in 250 ml. 

Flucytosine is a complementary list medicine. 

Uses: adjunct to amphotericin B (or fluconazole) in cryptococcal meningitis; 
adjunct to amphotericin B in systemic candidosis. 

Precautions: the elderly; renal impairment (Appendix 4); concomitant use with 
amphotericin B (both nephrotoxic); liver and kidney function tests and 
blood counts required (monitor weekly in renal impairment or in blood 
disorders); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Systemic candidosis and cryptococcosis, by intravenous infusion (over 20–
40 minutes), ADULT and CHILD, 200 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses usually 
for no more than 7 days (at least 4 months in cryptococcal meningitis); 
reduce dose to 100–150 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses if organisms are 
extremely sensitive. 

Systemic candidosis, initial treatment or after intravenous therapy, by mouth, 
ADULT and CHILD, 50–150 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses. 

NOTE. For plasma concentration monitoring blood should be taken shortly before the 
start of the next infusion (or before the next dose by mouth); plasma concentration for 
optimum response, 25–50 mg/litre; plasma concentration should not be allowed to 
exceed 80 mg/litre. 

Adverse effects: rash, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea; alterations in liver 
function tests; less frequently, confusion, hallucinations, convulsions, 
headache, sedation, and vertigo; blood disorders including leukopenia, 
potentially fatal thrombocytopenia, and aplastic anaemia. 

Griseofulvin 
Capsule or tablet: 125 mg; 250 mg. 

Uses: fungal infections of the skin, scalp, hair and nails where topical 
treatment has failed or is inappropriate. 

Contraindications: severe liver disease (Appendix 5); pregnancy (avoid 
pregnancy during and for 1 month after treatment; men should not father 
children within 6 months of treatment; Appendix 2); porphyria; systemic 
lupus erythematosus (risk of exacerbation). 

Precautions: pre-existing hepatic insufficiency (closely monitor hepatic 
function throughout treatment); blood disorders (monitor blood count 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 149 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

weekly during first month of treatment); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Superficial fungal infections, by mouth, ADULT, 0.5–1 g (but not less than 
10 mg/kg) daily with food in single or divided doses; CHILD, 10 mg/kg 
daily with food in single or divided doses. 

NOTE. Duration of treatment depends on the infection and thickness of keratin at the 
site of infection — at least 4 weeks for skin and hair, at least 6 weeks for scalp 
ringworm (and in severe infection, up to 3 months); up to 6 months for fingernails and 
up to 12 months or more for toenails.  

Adverse effects: headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, dizziness, and 
fatigue reported; leukopenia, hepatotoxicity; sleep disturbances; 
photosensitivity; systemic lupus erythematosus, toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
erythema multiforme; peripheral neuropathy; confusion and impaired 
coordination. 

Nystatin 
Lozenge: 100 000 IU. 
Pessary: 100 000 IU. 
Tablet: 100 000 IU; 500 000 IU. 

Uses: oral, oesophageal, intestinal, vaginal, and cutaneous candidosis. 
Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 
Dose:  
Oral candidosis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 1 month, 100 000 IU after 
food 4 times daily usually for 7 days; continue for 48 hours after lesions 
have resolved. 

Intestinal and oesophageal candidosis, by mouth, ADULT, 500 000 IU 4 times 
daily; continue for 48 hours after clinical cure; CHILD over 1 month, 
100 000 IU 4 times daily; continue for 48 hours after clinical cure. 

Vaginal candidosis, vaginal administration, ADULT, insert 1–2 pessaries at night 
for at least 2 weeks. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea at high doses; oral irritation 
and sensitization; rash and rarely erythema multiforme (Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome). 

 
 

150 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Potassium iodide 
Saturated solution. 

Potassium iodide is a complementary list medicine. 

Uses: sporotrichosis; subcutaneous phycomycosis; thyrotoxicosis 
(section 18.8). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to iodides; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); acute bronchitis or active tuberculosis. 

Precautions: Addison disease; cardiac disease; hyperthyroidism; myotonia 
congenita; renal impairment (Appendix 4). 

Dose:  
Sporotrichosis and subcutaneous phycomycosis, by mouth, ADULT, initially 1 ml 
3 times daily, increased by 1 ml daily, depending on tolerance, to 10 ml daily; 
continue treatment for at least 4 weeks after resolution or stabilization of 
lesions. 

NOTE. If signs of iodism occur, suspend treatment temporarily and restart after a few 
days at a lower dosage. 

Adverse effects: goitre, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism; hypersensitivity 
reactions; iodism (characterized by metallic taste, increased salivation, 
coryza-like symptoms, and irritation and swelling of the eyes and usually 
resulting from prolonged administration); also gastrointestinal disturbances 
and diarrhoea; pulmonary oedema, bronchitis; skin reactions; depression, 
insomnia, impotence, and headache reported. 

6.4 Antiviral medicines 

6.4.1 Antiherpes medicines 

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections 
Aciclovir is active against herpes viruses but does not eradicate them; it is only 
effective if started at the onset of infection. It is also used for prevention of 
recurrence in the immunocompromised. Genital lesions, oesophagitis, and 
proctitis may be treated with oral aciclovir. However, HSV encephalitis or 
pneumonitis should be treated with intravenous aciclovir. 
Valaciclovir [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], a prodrug of 
aciclovir, can be given by mouth as an alternative treatment for herpes simplex 
infections of the skin and mucous membranes (including initial and recurrent 
genital herpes). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 151 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Varicella–zoster infections 
Chickenpox in neonates should be treated with parenteral aciclovir to reduce 
the risk of severe disease. Otherwise, antiviral treatment is generally not 
required except for immunocompromised patients and those at special risk 
(for example, those with severe cardiovascular or respiratory disease, or a 
chronic skin disorder); aciclovir should be given for 10 days with at least 7 days 
of parenteral treatment. Specialist advice should be sought for the treatment of 
chickenpox during pregnancy. 
While most HIV-positive patients with herpes zoster (shingles) experience 
only one self-limiting disease course, some will suffer repeated episodes. 
Treatment should be reserved for debilitating disease and when there is high 
risk of serious complications, such as in advanced HIV disease. Aciclovir is the 
treatment of choice which can be administered either orally (in high doses) or, 
in the case of lack of response to oral therapy or central nervous system 
involvement, intravenously. 

Cytomegalovirus (CMV)  
Parenteral antiviral ganciclovir [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] 
arrests retinochoroiditis and enteritis caused by cytomegalovirus (CMV) in 
HIV-infected patients. Maintenance therapy with oral ganciclovir should be 
given to prevent relapse of retinitis. Alternative therapy is with intravenous 
foscarnet [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] which can be used if 
necessary. 

Aciclovir 
Powder for injection: 250 mg (as sodium salt) in vial.  
Tablet: 200 mg. 

Aciclovir is a representative antiviral medicine which is active against herpes simplex 
virus and varicella–zoster virus. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: treatment of primary genital herpes; disseminated varicella–zoster 
infections in immunocompromised patients; herpes simplex encephalitis; 
eye infections (section 21.1). 

Precautions: maintain adequate hydration; renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of herpes simplex (including genital herpes), by mouth, ADULT and 

CHILD over 2 years, 200 mg (400 mg in the immunocompromised or if 
absorption is impaired) 5 times daily, usually for 5 days (longer if new 

152 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

lesions appear during treatment or if healing is incomplete); CHILD under 
2 years, half the adult dose. 

Treatment of herpes simplex in the immunocompromised, severe initial genital 
herpes, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD over 12 years, 5 mg/kg 
every 8 hours, usually for 5 days. 

Treatment of disseminated herpes simplex, by intravenous infusion, NEONATE and 
INFANT up to 3 months, 20 mg/kg every 8 hours for 10–14 days (21 days if 
CNS involvement); CHILD 3 months–12 years, 250 mg/m2 every 8 hours, 
usually for 5 days. 

Prevention of recurrent herpes simplex, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg 4 times daily 
or 400 mg twice daily, reduced to 200 mg 2–3 times daily if possible and 
interrupted every 6–12 months for reassessment. 

Prophylaxis of herpes simplex in the immunocompromised, by mouth, ADULT 
and CHILD over 2 years, 200–400 mg 4 times daily; CHILD under 2 years, 
half the adult dose. 

Treatment of chickenpox, by mouth, ADULT, 800 mg 4–5 times daily for  
5–7 days; CHILD under 2 years, 200 mg 4 times daily, CHILD 2–5 years, 
400 mg 4 times daily; CHILD over 6 years, 800 mg 4 times daily. 

Treatment of herpes zoster, by mouth, ADULT, 800 mg 5 times daily for  
7–10 days. 

Treatment of varicella–zoster, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD over 
12 years, 5 mg/kg every 8 hours, usually for 5–7 days (doubled in the 
immunocompromised); NEONATE and INFANT up to 3 months,  
10–20 mg/kg every 8 hours for at least 7 days; CHILD 3 months–12 years, 
250 mg/m2 every 8 hours usually for 5 days (doubled in the 
immunocompromised). 

Treatment of herpes simplex encephalitis, varicella–zoster in the 
immunocompromised, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD over 
12 years, 10 mg/kg every 8 hours; CHILD 3 months–12 years, 500 mg/m2 
every 8 hours; usually given for at least 10 days in encephalitis, possibly for 
14–21 days. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer's 
directions. In obese patients, parenteral dose should be calculated on the basis of ideal 
weight for height (to avoid excessive dosage). 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, headache, 
fatigue, rash, urticaria, pruritus, photosensitivity; very rarely hepatitis, 
jaundice, dyspnoea, neurological reactions (including dizziness, confusion, 
hallucinations, convulsions, and drowsiness), acute renal failure, anaemia, 
thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia; on intravenous infusion, severe local 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 153 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

inflammation (sometimes resulting in ulceration), and very rarely fever, 
agitation, tremor, and psychosis. 

6.4.2 Antiretrovirals 

Antiretroviral medicines do not cure HIV infection; they only temporarily 
suppress viral replication and improve symptoms. Patients receiving these 
drugs require careful monitoring by appropriately trained health professionals 
in an adequately resourced setting. Rigorous promotion of measures to prevent 
new infections remains essential and its need is not diminished by the 
availability of antiretroviral medicines. Effective therapy requires the 
simultaneous use of 3 or 4 drugs; alternative regimens are necessary to meet 
specific requirements at start-up, to substitute for first-line regimens in cases of 
intolerance, or to replace failing regimens. The use of a 3- or 4-drug 
combination as specified in the WHO treatment guidelines is recommended. 
Fixed-dose preparations for some drug combinations are available; their use is 
recommended if the pharmaceutical quality is assured and interchangeability 
with the single products is demonstrated as specified by the relevant drug 
regulatory authority.  
Selection of 2 or 3 protease inhibitors from the WHO Model List will need to 
be determined by each country after consideration of local treatment 
guidelines and experience, as well as comparative costs of available products. 
Low-dose ritonavir is used in combination with indinavir, lopinavir or 
saquinavir as a “booster”; ritonavir is not recommended for use as a drug in its 
own right.  
 
WHO has published the following guidelines on antiretroviral therapy for human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV): 

Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in adults and adolescents: Recommendations for a public 
health approach, 2006 (available at: 
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/adult/en/index.html). 

Antiretroviral therapy of HIV infection in infants and children: Towards universal access: 
Recommendations for a public health approach, 2006 (available at: 
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/art/en/index.html). 

Antiretroviral drugs for treating pregnant women and preventing HIV infection in infants: Towards 
universal access: Recommendations for a public health approach, 2006 (available at: 
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/pmtct/en/index.html). 

Other current WHO guidelines on HIV and AIDS are available from the WHO web 
site: http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/en/. 

154 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Principles of treatment 

Treatment is aimed at reducing the plasma viral load as much as possible and 
for as long as possible; it should be started preferably before the immune 
system is irreversibly damaged and before the onset of clinical 
immunodeficiency. The need for early drug treatment should, however, be 
balanced against the development of toxicity. Commitment to treatment and 
strict adherence over many years are required; the regimen chosen should 
therefore take into account factors such as convenience and an individual’s 
tolerance of various antiretrovirals. The development of resistance is reduced 
by using a combination of 3 or 4 drugs; such combinations should have 
additive or synergistic activity while ensuring that their toxicity is not additive.  
Women of childbearing age receiving antiretroviral therapy should be offered 
effective contraceptive methods to prevent unintended pregnancy. Women 
who are taking non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors or protease 
inhibitors, which can lower blood concentration of hormonal oral 
contraceptives, should be advised to use additional or alternative 
contraceptives.  

Drugs used to treat HIV infection 

Zidovudine, a nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (or nucleoside 
analogue), was the first anti-HIV drug to be introduced. Other nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors include abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, 
lamivudine, and stavudine. Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors act in a 
similar way and include tenofovir.  
The protease inhibitors include indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir and 
saquinavir. Ritonavir in low doses is used in combination with indinavir, 
lopinavir or saquinavir as a booster. The small amount of ritonavir in such 
combinations has no intrinsic antiviral activity but increases the antiviral 
activity of the other protease inhibitors by reducing their rate of metabolism. 
Indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and possibly saquinavir inhibit the cytochrome 
P450 enzyme system and therefore have a potential for significant drug 
interactions. Protease inhibitors are associated with lipodystrophy and other 
metabolic effects (see below).  
The non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors include efavirenz and 
nevirapine. They interact with a number of drugs metabolized in the liver; the 
doses of protease inhibitors may need to be increased when they are given 
with efavirenz or nevirapine. Nevirapine is associated with a high incidence of 
rash (including Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and occasionally fatal hepatitis. 
Rash is also associated with efavirenz but it is usually milder. Use of efavirenz 
has also been associated with an increased plasma cholesterol concentration 
and neuropsychiatric symptoms (including sleep disorders and depression).  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 155 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Initiation of treatment 

The time for initiating antiviral treatment is determined by the clinical stage of 
the HIV infection as indicated by signs and symptoms, and where available, by 
the CD4-cell count. 
Recommended initial treatment with a potent combination of antiretroviral 
medicines (highly active antiretroviral therapy or HAART) includes:  

- 2 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (section 6.4.2.1) 

PLUS 

- a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (section 6.4.2.2) 

OR 

- a third nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (section 6.4.2.1) 

OR 

- a protease inhibitor which may be combined with ritonavir as booster 
(section 6.4.2.3) 

Monitoring 

In resource-limited settings, the basic clinical assessment before initiating 
antiretroviral therapy should comprise documentation of past medical history, 
identification of current and past HIV-related illnesses, identification of co-
existing medical conditions that may influence the choice of therapy (for 
example, pregnancy or tuberculosis), as well as identification of current 
symptoms and physical signs. 
The absolute minimum laboratory tests that should be performed before initiating 
antiretroviral therapy are an HIV antibody test (in patients over 18 months of 
age) and a haemoglobin or haematocrit measurement.  
Additional basic testing should include:  

- white blood cell count; 
- differential cell count (to identify a decline in neturophils and the possibility of 

neutropenia); 
- total lymphopcyte count; 
- serum alanine or aspartate aminotransferase concentration to assess the possibility 

of hepatitis co-infection and to monitor for hepatotoxicity; 
- serum creatine and/or blood urea nitrogen to assess baseline renal function; 
- serum glucose; 
- pregnancy tests for women. 

Desirable supplemental tests include measurement of liver enzymes, creatinine, 
glucose, and serum lipids. CD4-cell determinations are, of course, highly 
desirable and efforts should be made to make these widely available. Viral load 
testing is currently considered to be optional because the exact threshold for 

156 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

switching therapy is still not clearly defined; its role in long-term therapy, 
particularly in settings with a limited formulary and health-care infrastructure, 
is not well established.  

Changing therapy 

Deterioration in the patient’s condition (including clinical, immunological, and 
virological changes) usually calls for replacement of the failing drugs. 
Intolerance to adverse effects and drug-induced organ dysfunction also usually 
require a change in therapy. 
The choice of an alternative regimen depends on factors such as the response 
to previous treatment, tolerance, and the possibility of cross-resistance. If 
treatment fails, a new second-line regimen will be needed. If toxicity occurs, 
and it is related to an identifiable drug in the regimen, the offending drug can 
be substituted with another drug that does not have the same adverse effect 
profile. However, if it is not possible to identify the offending drug, an entirely 
new regimen should be considered. 

Pregnancy 

Treatment of HIV infection in pregnancy aims to:  

- minimize the viral load and disease progression in the mother; 
- reduce the risk of toxicity to the fetus (although the teratogenic potential of most 

antiretroviral medicines is unknown); 
- prevent transmission of infection to the neonate. 

In pregnant women, it may be desirable to initiate antiretroviral therapy after 
the first trimester, although for pregnant women who are severely ill, the 
benefit of early therapy outweighs the potential risk to the fetus. All treatment 
options require careful assessment by a specialist.  
A combination of zidovudine, lamivudine, and nevirapine is the 
recommended treatment for women who are pregnant and are eligible for 
antiviral treatment. Alternative regimens can be used. Although monotherapy 
with either zidovudine or nevirapine reduces transmission of infection to the 
neonate (see also below), a combination antiretroviral therapy not only 
maximizes the chance of preventing transmission but also represents optimal 
therapy for the mother’s own health. Low-dose ritonavir is required if either 
indinavir or saquinavir is used in pregnancy because adequate drug 
concentration is achieved only with ritonavir boosting. 
Lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis associated with didanosine and stavudine 
may be more frequent in pregnant women, particularly when both drugs are 
used concomitantly. Tenofovir, despite being non-teratogenic, is associated 
with potential fetal bone toxicity. Emtricitabine is believed to be non-
teratogenic in humans; however, experience of its use in pregnancy is still 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 157 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

limited. For these reasons it is recommended that emtricitabine, didanosine, 
stavudine, and tenofovir be used in pregnancy only when no alternatives are 
available. Protease inhibitors have been associated with glucose intolerance and 
pregnant women should be instructed to recognize symptoms of 
hyperglycaemia and to seek health care advice if these occur.  
Various regimens have been used to specifically prevent the transmission of 
HIV from mother to the neonate at term. Women not already taking 
antiretrovirals should receive zidovudine from the 28th week of pregnancy (or 
as soon as possible thereafter); they should also receive a single dose of 
nevirapine during labour. Zidovudine and lamivudine should also be given to 
the mother during labour and for 1 week after birth.  
Newborn infants should receive a single dose of nevirapine, as well as 
zidovudine for 1 week. Longer courses of zidovudine, usually up to 4 weeks, 
may be necessary depending on the antiretroviral medicine regimen given to 
the mother. Alternative regimens can be used.  

Breastfeeding 

Antiretroviral medicines may be present in breast milk, and may reduce the 
viral load in breast milk and thus reduce the risk of mother-to-child 
transmission through breastfeeding. However, the concentration of 
antiretroviral medicines in breast milk may not be adequate to prevent viral 
replication and there is therefore the possibility of promoting the development 
of drug-resistant virus which could be transmitted to the infant. 
Women with HIV infection should be counselled about the risks of 
breastfeeding and advised, if it is possible, to avoid breastfeeding. When 
replacement feeding is acceptable, feasible, affordable, sustainable, and safe, 
breastfeeding should be avoided. Otherwise, exclusive breastfeeding is 
recommended during the first months of life and should then be discontinued 
as soon as it is feasible. HIV-infected women should be counselled on infant 
feeding options and should be supported in their choice.  

Post-exposure prophylaxis 

Treatment with antiretroviral medicines may be appropriate following 
occupational exposure to HIV-contaminated material and sexual assault. 
Immediate expert advice should be sought in such cases; national guidelines on 
post-exposure prophylaxis for health-care workers and victims of sexual 
assault have been developed and local ones may also be available. 

Lipodystrophy and metabolic effects 

Metabolic effects associated with antiretroviral therapy include fat 
redistribution, insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia; collectively these effects 

158 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

have been termed lipodystrophy syndrome. Regimens containing protease 
inhibitors and some nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (particularly 
stavudine) are associated with redistribution of body fat in some patients (for 
example, decreased fat under the skin, increased abdominal fat, “buffalo 
humps” and breast enlargement). Some antiretrovirals, particularly the protease 
inhibitors, are associated with dyslipidaemia. Protease inhibitors are also 
associated with metabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance and 
hyperglycaemia. Clinical examination should include an evaluation of fat 
distribution; monitoring of serum lipids and blood glucose should also be 
considered. 

Abbreviations 

The following table lists the abbreviations that are sometimes used for 
antiretroviral medicines.  

Generic name Most common and Alternative abbreviations 
preferred 

abbreviation 
Abacavir ABC  ABV  
Atazanavir ATV ATZ 
Darunavir DRV TMC-114, DAR 
Didanosine ddI DDI, DID 
Efavirenz EFV EFZ 
Emtricitabine FTC ETC, ETB 
Enfuvirtide ENF T-20, ENV, EFT 
Fosamprenavir FPV f-APV, FOS 
Indinavir IDV IND  
Lamivudine 3TC LMV, LAM 
Lopinavir LPV LOP 
Maraviroc MVC  UK-427,857, MRV, MAR 
Nevirapine NVP NEV  
Raltegravir RAL MK-0518, RTG, RGV, RALT   
Ritonavir RTV, r* RIT 
Saquinavir SQV SAQ 
Stavudine d4T STV, D4T 
Tenofovir TDF TNV, TNF 
Tipranavir TPV PNU-140,690, TPN 
Zidovudine AZT ZDV 
 
* Preferred option if used at low dose as a pharmacological booster. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 159 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Fixed-dose combinations 

Efavirenz + emtricitabine + tenofovir 
Tablet: 600 mg + 200 mg + 300 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines. 

Contraindications: pregnancy (see introductory note above and under 
Efavirenz; Appendix 2).  

Precautions: see under Efavirenz, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir. 
Dose:  

HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines, by mouth, ADULT over 18 years, 1 tablet once daily. 

Adverse effects: see under Efavirenz, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir. 

Emtricitabine + tenofovir 
Tablet: 200 mg + 300 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines. 

Precautions: see under Emtricitabine and Tenofovir. 
Dose:  

HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines, by mouth, ADULT over 18 years, 1 tablet once daily. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Tablets can be dispersed in at least 100 ml water, orange juice or 
grape juice for patients who have difficulty swallowing. 

Adverse effects: see under Emtricitabine and Tenofovir. 

Stavudine + lamivudine + nevirapine 
Tablet: 30 mg + 150 mg + 200 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines. 

Precautions: see under Lamivudine, Nevirapine, and Stavudine; combined 
preparation not suitable for use in children. 

Dose:  
HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines, by mouth, ADULT, 1 tablet twice daily. 

160 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

NOTE. A lead-in dose of nevirapine, 200 mg once daily for 14 days, is recommended 
for those who have just initiated therapy with nevirapine; the other drugs should be 
taken separately during this time. This twice daily fixed-dose combination tablet can 
then be started as long as there are no rash or liver function test abnormalities present 
(see under Precautions for nevirapine). If treatment with the fixed-dose combination 
tablet is interrupted for more than 7 days, reintroduce using a lead-in dose of nevirapine, 
200 mg daily, and separate tablets for the other medicines. 

Adverse effects: see under Lamivudine, Nevirapine, and Stavudine. 

Zidovudine + lamivudine 
Tablet: 300 mg + 150 mg. 

NOTE. The abbreviation, AZT, which has sometimes been used for zidovudine has 
also been used for another medicine. 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least one other antiretroviral 
medicine. 

Precautions: see under Lamivudine, and Zidovudine. 
Dose:  

HIV infection in combination with at least one other antiretroviral medicine, 
by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 12 years, 1 tablet twice daily. 

Adverse effects: see under Lamivudine and Zidovudine. 

Zidovudine + lamivudine + nevirapine 
Tablet: 300 mg + 150 mg + 200 mg. 

NOTE. The abbreviation, AZT, which has sometimes been used for zidovudine has 
also been used for another medicine. 

Uses: HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines. 

Precautions: see under Lamivudine, Nevirapine, and Zidovudine.  
Dose:  
HIV infection alone as a complete regimen or in combination with other 
antiretroviral medicines, by mouth, ADULT, 1 tablet twice daily. 

NOTE. A lead-in dose of nevirapine, 200 mg once daily for 14 days, is recommended 
for those who have just initiated therapy with nevirapine; the other drugs should be 
taken separately during this time. This twice daily fixed-dose combination tablet can 
then be started as long as there are no rash or liver function test abnormalities present 
(see under Precautions for nevirapine). If treatment of the fixed-dose combination 
tablet is interrupted for more than 7 days, reintroduce using a lead-in dose of nevirapine, 
200 mg daily, and separate tablets for the other medicines. 

Adverse effects: see under Lamivudine, Nevirapine, and Zidovudine. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 161 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

6.4.2.1 Nucleoside/Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors 

In some settings, it may not be possible to carry out full monitoring as 
described under each drug entry; in such cases the level of monitoring should 
be determined by local guidelines (see also introductory note above). 

Abacavir 
Oral liquid: 100 mg (as sulfate)/5 ml. 
Tablet: 300 mg (as sulfate). 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines.    

Precautions: chronic hepatitis B or C, hepatic impairment (see Note on 
hepatic disease below; Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1.   

HYPERSENSITIVITY Reactions. Life-threatening hypersensitivity reactions 
characterized most commonly by fever or rash and possibly nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, 
abdominal pain, dyspnoea, cough, lethargy, malaise, headache, and myalgia, less 
frequently by mouth ulceration, oedema, hypotension, sore throat, adult respiratory 
distress syndrome, paraesthesia, arthralgia, conjunctivitis, lymphadenopathy, 
lymphocytopenia, renal failure, and anaphylaxis and rarely by myolysis have been 
reported. Laboratory abnormalities may include raised liver enzymes (see Hepatic 
disease below) and creatine kinase. Symptoms usually appear in the first 6 weeks, but 
may occur at any time; monitor patients for symptoms every 2 weeks for 2 months; 
discontinue immediately if any symptom of hypersensitivity develops and do not 
rechallenge (risk of more severe hypersensitivity reaction); also discontinue if 
hypersensitivity cannot be ruled out, even when other diagnoses possible (if rechallenge 
is necessary, it must be carried out in a hospital setting). If abacavir is stopped for any 
reason other than hypersensitivity, exclude hypersensitivity reaction as the cause and 
rechallenge only if medical assistance is readily available; care is needed with 
concomitant use of drugs which are known to cause skin toxicity.    

PATIENT ADVICE. Patients should be told about the importance of regular dosing 
(intermittent therapy may increase sensitization), how to recognize signs of 
hypersensitivity, and advised to seek immediate medical attention if symptoms develop 
or before re-starting treatment.   

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis, liver enzyme abnormalities, or 
risk factors for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse) and 
discontinue if rapid deterioration in liver function tests, symptomatic hyperlactataemia, 
progressive hepatomegaly, or lactic acidosis occurs.   

162 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  

HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral medicines, 
by mouth, ADULT, 300 mg twice daily; CHILD 3 months–16 years, 8 mg/kg 
twice daily (maximum, 600 mg daily).   

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, anorexia, lethargy, fatigue, fever, headache, insomnia, and 
dizziness (see also note on Hypersensitivity reactions above); blood 
disorders; lipodystrophy (see introductory note above); pancreatitis, liver 
damage and lactic acidosis (see note on Hepatic disease above); very rarely 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis; rash and 
gastrointestinal disturbances more common in children. 

Didanosine  
Buffered powder for oral liquid: 100 mg; 167 mg; 250 mg packets.  
Capsule (unbuffered enteric-coated):125 mg; 200 mg; 250 mg; 400 mg. 
Tablet (buffered chewable, dispersible): 25 mg; 50 mg; 100 mg; 150 mg; 
200 mg. 

NOTE. Antacids in some formulations may affect absorption of other drugs (see also 
Appendix 1). 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines. 

Precautions: history of pancreatitis (preferably avoid, otherwise exercise 
extreme caution; see also note below); peripheral neuropathy or 
hyperuricaemia (see also under Adverse effects); chronic hepatitis B or C; 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (see note on Hepatic 
diseases below; Appendix 5); pregnancy (see introductory note above; 
Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); 
dilated retinal examinations recommended (especially in children) every 
6 months, or if visual changes occur; interactions: Appendix 1. 

PANCREATITIS. If symptoms of pancreatitis develop or if serum amylase or lipase is 
raised (even if patient is asymptomatic), suspend treatment until diagnosis of 
pancreatitis is excluded; on return to normal values, re-initiate treatment only if 
essential (using a low dose, increased gradually if appropriate). Whenever possible avoid 
concomitant treatment with other drugs known to cause pancreatic toxicity (for 
example, intravenous pentamidine); monitor patient closely if concomitant therapy is 
unavoidable. Since significant elevations of triglycerides cause pancreatitis, monitor 
patient closely if these are elevated. 

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis, liver enzyme abnormalities, or 
risk factors for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse) and 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 163 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

discontinue if rapid deterioration in liver function tests, symptomatic hyperlactataemia, 
progressive hepatomegaly or lactic acidosis occurs. 
Dose:  
In combination with other antiretroviral medicines, by mouth, ADULT under 
60 kg, 250 mg daily in 1–2 divided doses; ADULT over 60 kg, 400 mg daily in 
1–2 divided doses; CHILD under 3 months, 50 mg/m2 twice daily; CHILD 
3 months–13 years, 90–120 mg/m2 twice daily or 180-240 mg/m2 once 
daily.  

PATIENT ADVICE. To ensure sufficient antacid from buffered tablets, each dose to 
be taken as 2 tablets (child under 1 year, 1 tablet), chewed thoroughly, crushed, or 
dispersed in water; tablets should be taken at least 1 hour before food or on an empty 
stomach. 

Adverse effects: pancreatitis (see also under Precautions); peripheral 
neuropathy especially in advanced HIV infection (suspend treatment; a 
reduced dose may be tolerated when symptoms resolve); hyperuricaemia 
(suspend treatment if significant elevation); diarrhoea (occasionally serious); 
nausea, vomiting, dry mouth, parotid gland enlargement, sialadenitis, 
headache, hypersensitivity reactions, dry eyes, retinal and optic nerve 
changes (especially in children), diabetes mellitus, hypoglycaemia, raised 
liver enzymes (see also under Precautions), liver failure, acute renal failure, 
and rhabdomyolysis also reported; alopecia, insomnia, dizziness, blood 
disorders, lipodystrophy (see introductory note above). 

Emtricitabine  
Capsule: 200 mg. 
Oral liquid: 10 mg/ml. 

NOTE. 240 mg oral solution or 200 mg capsule. Where appropriate, capsules may be 
used instead of oral solution. Oral solution contains propylene glycol as an excipient.  

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4), hepatic disease (see note below); 
pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 3), interactions: Appendix 1.  

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis (especially hepatitis C treated 
with interferon alfa and ribavirin), liver enzyme abnormalities, or risk factors for liver 
disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse); discontinue if rapid deterioration 
in liver function tests, symptomatic hyperlactataemia, progressive hepatomegaly or 
lactic acidosis occurs. Exacerbation of hepatitis in patients with chronic hepatitis B may 
occur on discontinuation of emtricitabine. 

164 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT and CHILD, over 33 kg, 1 capsule (200 mg) or 24 ml (240 mg) oral 
solution once daily; CHILD 4 months–18 years, under 33 kg, 6 mg/kg oral 
solution once daily. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, diarrhoea; 
headache, dizziness, peripheral neuropathy, asthenia, insomnia, abnormal 
dreams, depression;  anaemia, neutropenia; arthralgia, myalgia, bone 
necrosis; raised serum lipase, amylase, creatine kinase, and liver enzymes 
(see also note on Hepatic disease above), hyperbilirubinaemia, 
hypertriglyceridaemia, hyperglycaemia; rash, pruritus, urticaria, 
hyperpigmentation; lipodystrophy and metabolic effects (see also 
introductory note above).   

Lamivudine 
Oral liquid: 50 mg/5 ml.  
Tablet: 150 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least 2 other antiretroviral 
medicines; prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); chronic hepatitis B or C; hepatic 
disease (see note below); pregnancy (see introductory note above; 
Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis (especially hepatitis C 
treated with interferon alfa and ribavirin), liver enzyme abnormalities, or risk factors 
for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse); and discontinue if 
rapid deterioration in liver function tests, symptomatic hyperlactataemia, progressive 
hepatomegaly or lactic acidosis occurs. Exacerbation of hepatitis in patients with 
chronic hepatitis B may occur on discontinuation of lamivudine. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT, 150 mg twice daily or 300 mg once daily; INFANT under 1 month, 
2 mg/kg twice daily; CHILD 1 month or over, 4 mg/kg twice daily 
(maximum, 300 mg daily). 

Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (see also introductory note 
above under Pregnancy), by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg at onset of labour 
followed by 150 mg every 12 hours until delivery; after delivery 150 mg 
twice a day for 7 days. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 165 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain; cough; headache, 
fatigue, insomnia; malaise, fever, rash, alopecia, muscle disorders; nasal 
symptoms; peripheral neuropathy reported; rarely pancreatitis (discontinue); 
neutropenia, anaemia, thrombocytopenia and red cell aplasia; lactic acidosis; 
raised liver enzymes and serum amylase reported. 

Stavudine  
Capsule: 15 mg; 20 mg; 30 mg; 40 mg.  
Powder for oral liquid: 5 mg/5 ml. 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines. 

Precautions: history of peripheral neuropathy (see note below); history of 
pancreatitis or concomitant use with other drugs associated with 
pancreatitis; chronic hepatitis B or C; hepatic disease (see note below); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (see introductory note above; 
Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1.  

PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY. Suspend if peripheral neuropathy develops 
(characterized by persistent numbness, tingling or pain in the feet or hands); if 
symptoms resolve satisfactorily on withdrawal, and if stavudine needs to be 
continued, resume treatment at half the previous dose. 

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis, liver enzyme abnormalities, 
or risk factors for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse) and 
discontinue if rapid deterioration in liver function tests, symptomatic 
hyperlactataemia, progressive hepatomegaly, or lactic acidosis occurs. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT under 60 kg, 30 mg twice daily preferably at least 1 hour before food; 
ADULT over 60 kg, 40 mg twice daily; CHILD over 3 months, under 30 kg, 
1 mg/kg twice daily; CHILD over 30 kg, 30 mg twice daily. 

Adverse effects: peripheral neuropathy (dose-related; see note above); 
pancreatitis; nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation, anorexia, abdominal 
discomfort; chest pain; dyspnoea; headache, dizziness, insomnia, mood 
changes; abnormal dreams, cognitive dysfunction, drowsiness, depression, 
anxiety; gynaecomastia; asthenia, musculoskeletal pain; influenza-like 
symptoms, rash and other allergic reactions; lymphadenopathy; neoplasms; 
elevated liver enzymes (see note on Hepatic disease above) and serum 
amylase; neutropenia, thrombocytopenia. 

 

166 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate  
Tablet: 300 mg (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate - equivalent to 245 mg 
tenofovir disoproxil). 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with other antiretroviral medicines. 
Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4), hepatic disease (see note below); 
pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1.   

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis (especially hepatitis C 
treated with interferon alfa and ribavirin), liver enzyme abnormalities, or risk factors 
for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse) and discontinue if 
rapid deterioration in liver function tests, symptomatic hyperlactataemia, progressive 
hepatomegaly, or lactic acidosis occurs. Exacerbation of hepatitis in patients with 
chronic hepatitis B may occur on discontinuation of tenofovir. 

Dose:  

HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 
ADULT, 245 mg (1 tablet) once daily.  

PATIENT ADVICE. Tablets can be dispersed in at least 100 ml water, orange juice, or 
grape juice for patients with difficulty swallowing. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, flatulence, diarrhoea, 
anorexia; hypophosphataemia; dizziness, peripheral neuropathy, headache, 
dyspnoea, insomnia, depression, asthenia, sweating, myalgia, rash, 
hypertriglyceridaemia, hyperglycaemia, neutropenia; nephritis, nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus, renal impairment, effects on renal proximal tubules 
(including Fanconi syndrome), proteinuria, polyuria; reduced bone density; 
pancreatitis, hepatitis, lactic acidosis; raised liver enzymes, creatinine, and 
serum amylase reported (see also note on Hepatic disease above). 

Zidovudine 
Capsule: 100 mg; 250 mg. 
Oral liquid: 50 mg/5 ml. 
Solution for IV infusion injection: 10 mg/ml in 20-ml vial. 
Tablet: 300 mg. 

Also known as azidothymidine.   

NOTE. The abbreviation AZT which has sometimes been used for zidovudine has also 
been used for another medicine.   

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines; prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission.    

WHO Model Formulary 2008 167 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Contraindications: abnormally low neutrophil counts or haemoglobin (consult 
product literature); neonates with either hyperbilirubinaemia requiring 
treatment other than phototherapy or raised transaminase (consult product 
literature).    

Precautions: haematological toxicity; vitamin B12 deficiency (increased risk of 
neutropenia); anaemia or myelosuppression (reduce dose or interrupt 
treatment according to product literature); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
chronic hepatitis B or C; hepatic impairment (see note on Hepatic disease 
below; Appendix 5); the elderly; pregnancy (see introductory note above; 
Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1.    

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening lactic acidosis and severe 
hepatomegaly with steatosis have been reported. Exercise caution in patients 
(particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis, liver enzyme abnormalities, 
or risk factors for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including alcohol abuse) and 
discontinue if rapid deterioration in liver function tests, symptomatic 
hyperlactataemia, progressive hepatomegaly, or lactic acidosis occurs. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT, 500–600 mg daily in 2–3 divided doses; INFANT under 4 weeks, 
4 mg/kg twice daily; CHILD 4 weeks–13 years, 180 mg/m2 twice daily. 

HIV infection in patients temporarily unable to take zidovudine by mouth, by 
intravenous infusion over 1 hour, ADULT, 1–2 mg/kg every 4 hours 
(approximating to 1.5–3 mg/kg every 4 hours by mouth) usually for not 
more than 2 weeks; CHILD 3 months–12 years, 80–160 mg/m2 every 
6 hours (120 mg/m2 every 6 hours approximates to 180 mg/m2 every 
6 hours by mouth). 

Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (see also introductory note 
above under Pregnancy):  
by mouth, ADULT, 300 mg twice daily from week 28 of pregnancy; 600 mg at 
onset of labour (or 300 mg at onset of labour, followed by 300 mg every 
3 hours until delivery); 300 mg twice daily after delivery for 7 days; 
NEONATE, 4 mg/kg every 12 hours starting within 12 hours of birth for up 
to 1–6 weeks depending on national recommendations;  
by intravenous infusion, NEONATE, 1.5 mg/kg every 6 hours until oral dosing 
possible.   

ADMINISTRATION AND DILUTION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: anaemia (may require transfusion), neutropenia, and 
leukopenia (all more frequent with high dose and advanced disease); also 
nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, diarrhoea, flatulence, taste 
disturbance, pancreatitis, liver disorders including fatty change and raised 

168 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

bilirubin and liver enzymes (see note on Hepatic disease above); chest pain, 
dyspnoea, cough; influenza-like symptoms, headache, fever, paraesthesia, 
neuropathy, convulsions, dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, anxiety, 
depression, loss of mental acuity, malaise, anorexia, asthenia, myopathy, 
myalgia; pancytopenia, thrombocytopenia; gynaecomastia; urinary frequency; 
rash, pruritus; pigmentation of nail, skin, and oral mucosa. 

6.4.2.2   Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 

In some settings, it may not be possible to carry out full monitoring as 
described under each drug entry; in such cases, the level of monitoring should 
be determined by local guidelines (see also introductory note above). 

Efavirenz  
Capsule: 50 mg; 100 mg; 200 mg.  
Oral liquid: 150 mg/5 ml. 
Tablet: 600 mg. 

NOTE. The bioavailability of efavirenz from the oral solution is lower than that from 
the capsules and tablets; the oral solution is therefore not interchangeable with either 
the capsules or tablets on a milligram-for-milligram basis. 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines. 

Contraindications: pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2; 
substitute nevirapine for efavirenz in pregnant women or women for whom 
effective contraception cannot be assured). 

Precautions: chronic hepatitis B or C; hepatic impairment (avoid if severe; 
Appendix 5); severe renal impairment (Appendix 4); breastfeeding (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 3); the elderly; history of mental illness 
or seizures; interactions: Appendix 1.  

RASH. Rash, usually occurring in the first 2 weeks, is the most common adverse effect; 
discontinue if rash is severe or if rash is accompanied by blistering, desquamation, 
mucosal involvement or fever; if rash is mild or moderate, continue without 
interruption (rash usually resolves within 1 month). 

PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS. Patients should be advised to seek medical attention if 
severe, depression, psychosis or suicidal ideation occur. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 169 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines),  
by mouth (as tablets or capsules), ADULT and CHILD 40 kg and over, 600 mg 
once daily; CHILD over 3 years/10–14 kg, 200 mg once daily; CHILD  
15–19 kg, 250 mg once daily; CHILD 20–24 kg, 300 mg once daily; CHILD 
25–32 kg, 350 mg once daily; CHILD 33–39 kg, 400 mg once daily; 
by mouth (as oral solution), ADULT and CHILD 40 kg and over, 720 mg once 
daily; CHILD over 3 years/10–15 kg, 270 mg once daily; CHILD 15–20 kg, 
300 mg once daily; CHILD 20–24 kg, 360 mg once daily; CHILD 25–32 kg, 
450 mg once daily; CHILD 33–39 kg, 510 mg once daily. 

Adverse effects: rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (see also note 
above); abdominal pain, diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting; anxiety, depression, 
dizziness, headache, insomnia, somnolence, abnormal dreams, fatigue, 
impaired concentration (administration at bedtime especially in the first  
2–4 weeks reduces central nervous system effects); pruritus; less frequently 
hepatitis, psychosis, mania, suicidal ideation, amnesia, ataxia, convulsions, 
and blurred vision; raised serum cholesterol, elevated liver enzymes 
(especially if seropositive for hepatitis B or C), pancreatitis, gynaecomastia, 
and photosensitivity also reported. 

Nevirapine  
Oral liquid: 50 mg/5 ml. 
Tablet: 200 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines; prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission. 

Contraindications: severe hepatic impairment; post-exposure prophylaxis 
Precautions: hepatic impairment (see note below; Appendix 5); chronic 
hepatitis B or C, high CD4 cell count, and women (greater risk of hepatic 
side-effects — preferably avoid in women with a CD4 cell count greater 
than 250 cells/mm3 and in men with a CD4 cell count greater than 
400 cells/mm3;  pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2); 
breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

HEPATIC DISEASE. Potentially life-threatening hepatotoxicity, including fatal 
fulminant hepatitis, reported usually occurring in the first 6 weeks. Close monitoring 
is required during first 18 weeks; assess liver function before treatment then every 
2 weeks for 2 months, then after 1 month, and then regularly. Discontinue 
permanently if liver abnormalities are accompanied by hypersensitivity reactions (for 
example, rash, fever, arthralgia, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, hepatitis, renal 
impairment, eosinophilia, and granulocytopenia). If severe liver abnormalities occur 

170 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

without hypersensitivity reactions, suspend, but discontinue permanently if 
significant liver function abnormalities recur. Monitor patient closely if there are 
mild to moderate liver abnormalities with no hypersensitivity reactions. 

NOTE. If treatment is interrupted for more than 7 days, reintroduce at a low dose and 
increase dose cautiously. 

RASH. Rash, usually occurring in first 6 weeks, is the most common side-effect; 
incidence can be reduced if introduced at low dose and dose increased gradually. 
Monitor closely for skin reactions during first 18 weeks; discontinue permanently if 
rash is severe or if rash is accompanied by blistering, oral lesions, conjunctivitis, 
facial oedema, general malaise, or hypersensitivity reactions; if rash is mild or 
moderate, continue without interruption but dose should not be increased until rash 
resolves 

PATIENT ADVICE. Patients should be told how to recognize hypersensitivity 
reactions and advised to discontinue treatment and seek immediate medical 
attention if symptoms of hepatitis, severe skin reaction, or hypersensitivity reactions 
develop. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT, 200 mg once daily for first 14 days, then (if no rash present) 200 mg 
twice daily; INFANT 15–30 days old, 5 mg/kg once daily for 14 days, then (if 
no rash present) 120 mg/m2 twice daily for 14 days, then 200 mg/m2 twice 
daily; CHILD 1 month–13 years, 120 mg/m2 once daily for first 14 days, 
then (if no rash present) 120–200 mg/m2 twice daily. 

Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (see also introductory note 
above under Pregnancy), by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg as a single dose at onset 
of labour; NEONATE, 2 mg/kg as a single dose within 72 hours of birth; if 
the maternal dose is given less than 2 hours before delivery, 2 mg/kg 
should be given immediately after birth, followed by a further dose within 
24–72 hours. 

NOTE. In adults, if treatment is interrupted for more than 7 days, reintroduce at a dose 
of 200 mg daily (INFANT 15–30 days old, 5 mg/kg; CHILD over 1 month, 120 mg/m2) 
and increase dose cautiously. 

Adverse effects: rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome and rarely, toxic 
epidermal necrolysis (see also note on Rash above); nausea, hepatitis (see 
also note on Hepatic disease above), headache; less commonly vomiting, 
abdominal pain, fatigue, fever, and myalgia; rarely diarrhoea, angioedema, 
anaphylaxis, hypersensitivity reactions (may involve hepatic reactions and 
rash; see note on Hepatic disease above); arthralgia, anaemia, and 
granulocytopenia (more frequent in children); very rarely neuropsychiatric 
reactions. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 171 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

6.4.2.3 Protease inhibitors 

In some settings, it may not be possible to carry out full monitoring as 
described under each drug entry; in such cases, the level of monitoring should 
be determined by local guidelines (see also introductory note above). 

Indinavir  
Capsule: 200 mg; 333 mg; 400 mg (as sulfate). 

Uses: HIV infection usually in combination with two nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors and a low-dose ritonavir booster. 

Contraindications: porphyria. 
Precautions: chronic hepatitis B or C (increased risk of hepatotoxicity); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); ensure adequate hydration (to reduce risk of 
nephrolithiasis); patients at risk of nephrolithiasis (monitor for 
nephrolithiasis); diabetes mellitus (see also introductory notes above under 
Lipodystrophy and metabolic effects); haemophilia; pregnancy (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note 
above; Appendix 3); metabolism of many drugs inhibited if administered 
concomitantly; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines and a 
ritonavir booster), by mouth, ADULT, indinavir, 800 mg and ritonavir, 100 mg 
both twice daily. 

HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines but without 
a ritonavir booster), by mouth, ADULT, 800 mg every 8 hours; CHILD and 
ADOLESCENT 4–17 years, 500 mg/m2 every 8 hours (maximum, 800 mg 
every 8 hours); CHILD under 4 years, safety and efficacy not established. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Administer 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal; may be 
administered with a low-fat, light meal. When given in combination with didanosine, 
allow 1 hour between the drugs [antacids in buffered formulations of didanosine 
(tablets and oral solution) reduce absorption of indinavir]. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal discomfort, dyspepsia, 
flatulence, pancreatitis, dry mouth, taste disturbances; headache, dizziness, 
insomnia; myalgia, myositis, rhabdomyolysis, fatigue, hypoaesthesia, 
paraesthesia; hyperglycaemia; hypersensitivity reactions, rash (including 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome), pruritus, dry skin, hyperpigmentation, alopecia, 
paronychia; interstital nephritis, nephrolithiasis (may require interruption or 
discontinuation; more frequent in children), dysuria, haematuria, crystalluria, 
proteinuria, pyuria (in children); hepatitis, transient hyperbilirubinaemia; 

172 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

blood disorders including neutropenia, and haemolytic anaemia; 
lipodystrophy and metabolic effects (see also introductory note above). 

Lopinavir + ritonavir  
Capsule: 133.3 mg + 33.3 mg. 
Oral liquid: 400 mg + 100 mg/5 ml. 

NOTE. 5 ml oral solution = 3 capsules; where appropriate, capsules may be used 
instead of oral solution. Oral solution excipients include propylene glycol and alcohol, 
42%.   

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines.   

NOTE. Ritonavir increases the effect of lopinavir (see also introductory note above 
under Drugs used to treat HIV infection); the low dose in this combination does not 
have intrinsic antiviral activity. 

Precautions: chronic hepatitis B or C (increased risk of hepatotoxicity), hepatic 
impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
haemophilia; pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); diabetes mellitus; 
oral solution contains propylene glycol — avoid in hepatic and renal 
impairment, and in pregnancy, increased susceptibility to propylene glycol 
toxicity in slow metabolizers; concomitant use with drugs that prolong QT 
interval; interactions: Appendix 1.    

PANCREATITIS. Signs and symptoms suggestive of pancreatitis (including raised 
serum amylase and lipase) should be evaluated; discontinue if pancreatitis is 
diagnosed. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT and ADOLESCENT with body surface area of 1.3 m2 or greater, 
3 capsules or 5 ml twice daily (lopinavir, 400 mg + ritonavir, 100 mg twice 
daily); CHILD 6 months–13 years, lopinavir, 225 mg/m2 + ritonavir, 
56.25 mg/m2 twice daily (or body weight 7–15 kg, lopinavir, 12 mg/kg + 
ritonavir, 3 mg/kg twice daily; body weight 15–40 kg, lopinavir, 10 mg/kg 
+ ritonavir, 2.5 mg/kg twice daily).   

NOTE. Increase dose by 33% if used in combination with efavirenz or with 
nevirapine.   

PATIENT ADVICE. Each dose to be taken with food.   

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances, anorexia; hepatic dysfunction, 
pancreatitis (see note above); blood disorders (including anaemia, 
neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia), sleep disturbances, fatigue, headache, 
dizziness, paraesthesia; myalgia, myositis, rhabdomyolysis; taste disturbances; 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 173 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

rash, pruritus, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, hypersensitivity reactions; 
lipodystophy and metabolic effects (see also introductory note above); 
electrolyte disturbances in children; less commonly dysphagia, appetite 
changes, weight changes, cholecystitis, hypertension, myocardial infarction, 
palpitation, thrombophlebitis, vasculitis, chest pain, oedema, dyspnoea, 
cough, agitation, anxiety, amnesia, ataxia, hypertonia, confusion, depression, 
abnormal dreams, extrapyramidal effects, neuropathy, influenza-like 
syndrome, Cushing’s syndrome, hypothyroidism, menorrhagia, sexual 
dysfunction, breast enlargement, dehydration, hypercalciuria, lactic acidosis, 
arthralgia, hyperuricaemia, abnormal vision, otitis media, tinnitus, dry 
mouth, sialadenitis, mouth ulceration, periodontitis, acne, alopecia, dry skin, 
sweating, skin discoloration, and nail disorders; rarely prolonged PR interval. 

Nelfinavir  
Oral powder: 50 mg/g. 
Tablet: 250 mg (as mesilate). 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 5); hepatic impairment, chronic 
hepatitis B or C (increased risk of hepatotoxicity); diabetes mellitus; 
haemophilia; pregnancy (see introductory note above; Appendix 2); 
breastfeeding (see introductory note above; Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1.  

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 

ADULT, 1.25 g twice daily or 750 mg 3 times daily; CHILD under 1 year,  
65–75 mg/kg twice daily or 40–50 mg/kg 3 times daily; CHILD 1–13 years,  
55–65 mg/kg twice daily. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Administer with or after food; powder may be mixed with water, 
milk, formula feeds or pudding; it should not be mixed with acidic foods or juices 
owing to its taste. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, flatulence, abdominal pain; rash 
(very rarely erythema multiforme); reports of elevated creatine kinase, 
hepatitis, pancreatitis, neutropenia, and hypersensitivity reactions (including 
bronchospasm, fever, pruritus, and facial oedema); myalgia, myositis and 
rhabdomyolysis; lipodystrophy and metabolic effects (see also introductory 
note above). 

 
 
 

174 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Ritonavir  
Oral liquid: 400 mg/5 ml. 
Oral solid dosage form: 100 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection, as a booster to increase the effect of indinavir, lopinavir 
or saquinavir, in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines.   

Contraindications: severe hepatic impairment; porphyria.   
Precautions: chronic hepatitis B or C (increased risk of hepatotoxicity); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); diabetes mellitus; haemophilia; pregnancy (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note 
above; Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1.    

PANCREATITIS. Signs and symptoms suggestive of pancreatitis (including raised 
serum amylase and lipase) should be evaluated; discontinue if pancreatitis is diagnosed.   
Dose:  

HIV infection (as a booster with other antiretroviral medicines), by mouth, 
ADULT, 100 mg twice daily; CHILD 6 months–13 years, 57.5 mg/m2 twice 
daily or  
3–5 mg/kg twice daily (maximum, 100 mg twice daily).   

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea (may impair absorption — close 
monitoring required), abdominal pain, taste disturbances, dyspepsia, 
anorexia, throat irritation; vasodilatation, hypotension, syncope; headache, 
drowsiness; circumoral and peripheral paraesthesia, hyperaesthesia, 
dizziness, sleep disturbances, fatigue, rash, hypersensitivity reactions, 
leukopenia; seizures; raised liver enzymes, bilirubin, and uric acid; 
occasionally flatulence, eructation, dry mouth and ulceration, cough, anxiety, 
fever, pain, menorrhagia, myalgia, myositis, rhabdomyolysis, weight loss, 
decreased thyroxine, sweating, pruritus, electrolyte disturbances, anaemia, 
neutropenia, and increased prothrombin time; pancreatitis (see also note on 
Pancreatitis, above); lipodystrophy and metabolic effects (see also 
introductory note above). 

Saquinavir  
Capsule: 200 mg. 

Uses: HIV infection in combination with at least two other antiretroviral 
medicines and usually a low-dose ritonavir booster. 

Contraindications: severe hepatic impairment (Appendix 5). 
Precautions: chronic hepatitis B or C; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); diabetes mellitus; haemophilia; pregnancy (see 
introductory note above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see introductory note 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 175 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

above; Appendix 3); concomitant use of garlic (reduces plasma saquinavir 
concentration); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines and a 
ritonavir booster), by mouth, ADULT, 1 g saquinavir and 100 mg ritonavir 
twice daily. 

HIV infection (in combination with other antiretroviral medicines but without 
a ritonavir booster), by mouth, ADULT, 1.2 g every 8 hours after a meal; 
CHILD under 16 years, safety and efficacy not established. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Administer with or after food. 

NOTE. To avoid confusion between the different formulations of saquinavir, 
prescribers should specify the brand to be dispensed; absorption from gel-filled 
capsules containing saquinavir is much greater than from capsules containing saquinavir 
mesilate. Treatment should generally be initiated with gel-filled capsules. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, buccal and mucosal ulceration, abdominal 
discomfort, nausea, vomiting, taste disturbances; headache, chest pain, 
peripheral neuropathy, paraesthesia, dizziness, insomnia, mood changes, 
changes in libido, ataxia, musculoskeletal disorders, fatigue; hypersensitivity 
reactions, fever, pruritus, rash and other skin eruptions; rarely Stevens-
Johnson syndrome; thrombocytopenia and other blood disorders, liver 
damage, pancreatitis and nephrolithiasis; reports of elevated creatine kinase, 
raised liver enzymes and neutropenia when used in combination therapy; 
lipodystrophy and metabolic effects (see also introductory note above). 

6.4.3 Other antivirals 

Ribavirin 
Injection for intravenous administration: 1000 mg and 800 mg in 10-ml 
phosphate buffer solution. 
Oral solid dosage forms: 200 mg; 400 mg; 600 mg. 

Also known as Tribavirin. 

HAEMORRHAGIC FEVER VIRUS INFECTION. Ribavirin inhibits a variety of 
DNA and RNA viruses. It is active against viral haemorrhagic fevers caused by the 
Arenaviridae and Bunyaviridae family viruses, which include Lassa fever, Argentine 
haemorrhagic fever, Crimean–Congo haemorrhagic fever, and haemorrhagic fever with 
renal syndrome. Treatment of Lassa fever is most effective if started within 6 days of 
the onset of fever.  

Other indications for ribavirin include the treatment of respiratory syncytial virus 
infection, and, with peginterferon alfa or interferon alfa [not included on the 15th 

176 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

WHO Model List] for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C infection (consult 
manufacturer’s literature for details). 

Uses: treatment of haemorrhagic fever, including Lassa fever, Argentine 
haemorrhagic fever, and Crimean–Congo haemorrhagic fever; 
haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. 

Contraindications: pregnancy (see note below and under Precautions; 
Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); severe cardiac disease (including 
unstable or uncontrolled cardiac disease in previous 6 months); 
haemoglobinopathies (including thalassemia or sickle-cell anaemia), 
haemoglobin levels less than 8 g/dl; severe debilitating medical conditions; 
severe hepatic dysfunction or decompensated cirrhosis of the liver 
(Appendix 5); autoimmune disease (including autoimmune hepatitis). 

PREGNANCY. Risk of serious fetal abnormalities exists when ribavirin is used during 
pregnancy, but because of the high risk of mortality from haemorrhagic fevers, for both 
the mother and the fetus, maternal benefit should be considered. Lassa fever is 
especially severe late in pregnancy, with maternal death or fetal loss occurring in more 
than 80% of cases during the third trimester. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); monitor blood counts at least 
weekly; interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Both men and women should be advised to use contraception during and for 
at least 7 months after treatment. 
Dose:  
Haemorrhagic fevers, by mouth, ADULT, initially 2 g then 1 g every 6 hours for 
4 days, then 500 mg every 6 hours for 6 days; CHILD, initially 30 mg/kg 
then 15 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days, then 7 mg/kg every 6 hours for 
6 days. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Oral ribavirin should be taken with food. 

Haemorrhagic fevers, by slow intravenous infusion (over 10–15 minutes), ADULT, 
initially 17 mg/kg (maximum, 1 g) then 17 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days, 
then 8 mg/kg (maximum, 500 mg) every 8 hours for 6 days; CHILD, initially 
17 mg/kg, then 17 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days, then 7 mg/kg every 
8 hours for 6 days. 

Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, by slow intravenous infusion (over 10–
15 minutes), ADULT, initially 33 mg/kg (maximum, 1 g), then 16 mg/kg 
(maximum, 1 g) every 6 hours for 4 days, then 8 mg/kg (maximum, 500 mg) 
every 8 hours for 6 days. 

Adverse effects: haemolytic anaemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, aplastic 
anaemia; myocardial infarction, arrhythmias; infections; nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, colitis, anorexia, fever, rigors, dyspnoea, cough, dizziness, 
insomnia, myalgia, arthralgia, fatigue, headache, impaired concentration, 
irritability, anxiety, depression, suicidal ideation (more frequent in children), 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 177 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

autoimmune disorders, pulmonary toxicity, pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, 
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism; retinal haemorrhage, retinal thrombosis; 
alopecia, pruritus, rash; rarely hypersensitivity reactions. 

6.5 Antiprotozoal medicines 

6.5.1 Antiamoebic and antigiardiasis medicines 

Amoebiasis 
Amoebic dysentery is caused by Entamoeba  histolytica. It is transmitted by the 
faeco-oral route and infection is usually caused by ingestion of cysts from 
contaminated food and drink. Asymptomatic carriers are common in endemic 
areas. In non-endemic areas, symptomless carriers should be treated with a 
luminal amoebicide which will reduce the risk of transmission and protect the 
patient from invasive amoebiasis. Diloxanide is most widely used, but other 
compounds, including clefamide, etofamide, and teclozan [none of which are 
included on the 15th WHO Model List], are also effective. Treatment with 
diloxanide is regarded as successful if stools are free of E. histolytica for 
1 month. Several stool specimens should be examined when evaluating 
response to treatment.   
Symptomatic (invasive) amoebiasis may be classified as either intestinal or 
extra-intestinal. Intestinal forms of amoebiasis include amoebic dysentery and 
non-dysenteric amoebic colitis. Extra-intestinal amoebiasis most commonly 
involves the liver, but in some cases may involve the skin, the genitourinary 
tract, the lung and the brain. Invasive amoebiasis is more likely in malnutrition, 
immunosuppression, and pregnancy. Amoebic dysentery may take a 
fulminating course in late pregnancy and the puerperium period; treatment 
with metronidazole may be life saving. In less severe infection, metronidazole 
should, if possible, be avoided in the first trimester. All patients with invasive 
amoebiasis require treatment with a systemically active compound such as 
metronidazole, ornidazole or tinidazole [neither ornidazole or tinidazole are 
included on the 15th WHO Model List] followed by a luminal amoebicide 
(such as diloxanide) in order to eliminate any surviving organisms in the colon. 
Combined preparations are useful. 
In severe cases of amoebic dysentery, tetracycline given in combination with a 
systemic amoebicide lessens the risk of superinfection, intestinal perforation 
and peritonitis. Hepatic abscesses should be lanced by needle aspiration. 
 
 

178 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Giardiasis 
Giardiasis is caused by Giardia intestinalis and is acquired by oral ingestion of 
Giardia cysts. Giardiasis can be treated with tinidazole in a single dose or with 
another 5-nitroimidazole, such as metronidazole; both are highly effective and 
should be offered when practicable to all infected patients. Family and 
institutional contacts should also be treated. Larger epidemics are difficult to 
eradicate because of the high proportion of symptomless carriers and because 
excreted cysts can survive for long periods outside the human host.   

Trichomoniasis 
Trichomoniasis is an infection of the genitourinary tract caused by Trichomonas 
vaginalis and transmission is usually via the sexual route. In women it can cause 
vaginitis although some infected individuals remain asymptomatic. It is usually 
asymptomatic in men, but may cause urethritis. Patients and their sexual 
partners should be treated with metronidazole or another 5-nitroimidazole. 

Diloxanide 
Tablet: 500 mg (furoate). 

Uses: amoebiasis (asymptomatic carriers in non-endemic areas; eradication of 
residual luminal amoebae after treatment of invasive disease with other 
medicines). 

Precautions: pregnancy (defer treatment until after first trimester; Appendix 2) 
and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Dose:  

Amoebiasis (see Uses above), by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg 3 times daily for 
10 days; CHILD over 25 kg, 20 mg/kg daily in 3 divided doses for 10 days; 
course may be repeated if necessary. 

Adverse effects: flatulence; occasionally, vomiting, pruritus, and urticaria. 

Metronidazole 
Injection: 500 mg in 100-ml vial.  
Oral liquid: 200 mg (as benzoate)/5 ml.  
Tablet: 200–500 mg. 

Metronidazole is a representative antibacterial and antiprotozoal agent. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: invasive amoebiasis and giardiasis; trichomoniasis; tissue nematode 
infections especially dracunculiasis (section 6.1.1); bacterial infections 
(section 6.2.2); Helicobacter pylori eradication (section 17.1). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 179 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Contraindications: chronic alcohol dependence. 
Precautions: disulfiram-like reaction with alcohol; hepatic impairment and 
hepatic encephalopathy (Appendix 5); pregnancy (see introductory note 
above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); clinical and laboratory 
monitoring recommended in courses lasting longer than 10 days; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose: 
Invasive amoebiasis, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 30 mg/kg daily in 3 divided 
doses for 8–10 days; followed by a course of a luminal amoebicide (see 
introductory note above). 

Invasive amoebiasis (if oral administration not possible), by intravenous infusion, 
ADULT and CHILD, 30 mg/kg daily in 3 divided doses (until patient able to 
complete course with oral drugs); subsequent course of luminal amoebicide 
(see note above). 

Giardiasis, by mouth, ADULT, 2 g once daily for 3 days; CHILD, 15 mg/kg daily 
in divided doses for 5–10 days. 

Urogenital trichomoniasis, by mouth, ADULT, 2 g as a single dose or 400–500 mg 
twice daily for 7 days; sexual partners should be treated concomitantly. 

NOTE. In amoebiasis and giardiasis, various dosage regimens are used and definitive 
recommendations should be based on local experience. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Metronidazole tablets should be swallowed whole with water, 
during or after a meal; the oral suspension should be taken 1 hour before a meal. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, unpleasant metallic taste, furred tongue and 
gastrointestinal disturbances; rarely headache, drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, 
darkening of urine, erythema multiforme, pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, 
and anaphylaxis; abnormal liver function tests, hepatitis, jaundice, 
thrombocytopenia, aplastic anaemia, myalgia, arthralgia; peripheral 
neuropathy, epileptiform seizures, and leukopenia on prolonged or high-
dosage regimens. 

6.5.2 Antileishmaniasis medicines 

Leishmaniasis is caused by the parasitic protozoa, Leishmania, and is usually 
categorized as visceral, cutaneous, or mucocutaneous. It may manifest as a 
self-limiting localized skin lesion but can progress from this to mucosal 
involvement, to disseminated progressive disease (in the cutaneous form) or, 
without treatment, to a fatal disease (in the visceral form). With some 
exceptions (visceral leishmaniasis in south Asia and in eastern Africa, and 
cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania tropica), human beings are the 

180 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

incidental hosts of infection, and mammals, such as rodents and canids, are the 
reservoir hosts. The parasites are transmitted by sandflies.      

Visceral leishmaniasis 
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) is caused by Leishmania donovani and 
L. infantum (Old World) and by L. chagasi (New World). It is usually responsive, 
at least initially, to the pentavalent antimony compounds, meglumine 
antimoniate or sodium stibogluconate [not included on the 15th WHO Model 
List]. Patients are considered to be parasitologically cured when no parasites 
are detected in splenic or bone marrow aspirates. Amphotericin B, miltefosine 
or a combination of an antimonial with either miltefosine, amphotericin B, 
paromomycin (aminosidine), or pentamidine, have been used with success in 
patients in relapse who have become unresponsive to antimonials alone.   
In some areas, resistance to antimonials is widespread (for example, in India). 
In these areas, amphotericin B, parenteral paromomycin (aminosidine), or oral 
miltefosine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], can be used for the 
treatment of visceral leishmaniasis.    

Cutaneous leishmaniasis 
Cutaneous leishmaniasis comprises 2 conditions. The “Old World” variety is 
caused by L. tropica, L. major, L. infantum, or L. aethiopica. The “New World” 
variety is caused by L. amazonensis, L. mexicana, L. peruviana, L. guyanensis, 
L. panamensis, or L. braziliensis. These conditions are characterized by a cell-
mediated reaction of varying intensity at the site of inoculation. The New 
World variety tends to be more severe and slower to heal. Infections caused by 
L. major, L. mexicana, L. tropica, or L. peruviana are responsive to intralesional 
injections of antimonial compounds. Mild lesions can often be left to heal 
spontaneously. However, it is preferable to treat L. tropica infections with a 
view to reducing transmission since humans seem to be the only host. When 
the lesion is inflamed or ulcerated, larger than 3 cm in diameter or on the face 
close to the eyes, there are 3 or more lesions; or when there is either 
obstruction of lymphatic drainage, sporotricoid forms, lesions next to joints, 
superinfected lesions, or destruction of cartilage that create a risk of serious 
disfigurement or disability, antimonials should be administered systemically. 
Infections due to L. braziliensis and the less common, L. panamensis, should be 
treated with systemic antimonials because of the risk of mucosal involvement. 
At conventional doses L. aethiopica is less responsive and the sores should be 
left to heal spontaneously if there is no evidence of diffuse cutaneous 
involvement. L. guyanensis infections should be treated with pentamidine.   
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 181 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis 
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis is caused by L. braziliensis or L. panamensis. In this 
form of the disease, the primary lesions do not heal and spread to the mucosa 
may occur. It usually responds to antimonials and, when relapses occur, 
further extended courses of treatment are often successful. Patients who still 
fail to respond should receive amphotericin B or pentamidine, although 
neither treatment is highly satisfactory. Because of resistance to antimonials, 
L. aethiopica infections should be treated with pentamidine from the outset until 
complete healing occurs.   
Emergency use of corticosteroids may be needed to control pharyngeal or 
tracheal oedema produced by severe inflammation resulting from antigens 
liberated from dead parasites during the early phase of treatment.    
Antibiotics may also be needed to treat secondary infections. Plastic surgery 
offers the only means of ameliorating disfiguring scars.    

Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis 
Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis usually occurs following infection with 
L. amazonensis, L. aethiopica, or L. mexicana and is usually treated with antimonial 
compounds, but relapses must be expected and repeated courses of 
pentamidine may be needed until clinical immunity is established. 

Amphotericin B 
Powder for injection: 50 mg in vial. 

Amphotericin B is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of leishmaniasis.  

Uses: visceral and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis unresponsive to antimonial 
compounds; fungal infections (section 6.3). 

Precautions: initial test dose required (risk of anaphylaxis; see note below); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); monitor hepatic and renal function; blood 
counts, and plasma electrolyte concentrations throughout treatment; 
concomitant use of corticosteroids (avoid except to control inflammatory 
reactions); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid 
rapid infusion (risk of arrhythmias); interactions: Appendix 1. 

ANAPHYLAXIS. Anaphylaxis rarely occurs with intravenous amphotericin B and a 
test dose is advisable before commencing the first infusion. The patient should be 
observed for about 30 minutes after the test dose. 
Dose:  
Visceral and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (unresponsive to antimonial 
compounds), by intravenous infusion, ADULT, initial test dose, 1 mg over  
20–30 minutes, followed by 5–10 mg, gradually increased by 5–10 mg daily 

182 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

up to 0.5–1 mg/kg daily, which is then administered on alternate days (a 
total cumulative dose of 1–3 g is usually required). 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: fever, headache, anorexia, weight loss, nausea and vomiting, 
malaise, diarrhoea, muscle and joint pain, dyspepsia, epigastric pain; renal 
function disturbances including hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, and renal 
toxicity; blood disorders; cardiovascular toxicity (including arrhythmias); 
neurological disorders (including peripheral neuropathy); abnormal liver 
function (discontinue treatment); rash; anaphylactoid reactions (see note 
under Precautions above); pain and thrombophlebitis at injection site. 

Meglumine antimoniate 
Injection: 30%, equivalent to approximately 8.1% antimony in 5-ml ampoule. 

Meglumine antimoniate and sodium stibogluconate are the pentavalent antimony 
compound used to treat leishmaniasis. 

Uses: leishmaniasis. 
Contraindications: severe cardiac, liver, and kidney disorders; breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3). 

Precautions: The risk of serious, even fatal, toxicity of pentavalent antimonials 
is increased in patients who concomitantly present with: cardiac disease, in 
particular arrhythmia; renal failure, liver disease, severe malnutrition/ 
severely impaired general condition; advanced HIV infection; pregnancy.  If 
one of these conditions is present, provide protein-rich diet throughout 
treatment and, if possible, correct iron and other nutritional deficiencies; 
renal and hepatic impairment (Appendices 4 and 5); monitor cardiac, renal 
and hepatic function; treat intercurrent infection (for example pneumonia), 
and if possible an alternative drug should be used.   

MUCOCUTANEOUS DISEASE. Successful treatment of mucocutaneous 
leishmaniasis may induce severe inflammation around lesions (may be life-threatening if 
there is pharyngeal or tracheal involvement) which may require corticosteroid therapy 
(see also introductory notes above, under Mucocutaneous disease). 
Dose:    
NOTE. Doses are expressed in terms of pentavalent antimony.   

Visceral leishmaniasis, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 20 mg/kg 
daily for 28 days [minimum dose for children weighing less than 10 kg, 2 ml 
(200 mg)]; if relapse, retreat immediately with same daily dosage. 

 Cutaneous leishmaniasis, by intralesional injection, ADULT and CHILD, 1–3 ml into 
base of lesion; if no apparent response, may be repeated once or twice at 
intervals of 1–2 days; relapse is unusual.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 183 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Contraindications of local therapy:  

- Lesion in the face close to the eyes  
- 3 lesions or more  
- Large lesion more than 3 cm of diameter  
- Sporotricoid forms  
- Lesion on the joint  
- Super-infected lesions  
- Lesions produced by L. brazilensis, L. guyanensis and L. tropica.  

When systemic treatment is required for cutaneous leishmaniasis (except for 
lesions produced by L. brazilensis, L. guyanensis and L. tropica), pentavalent 
antimonials by intramuscular injection could be used with the following doses: 
ADULT and CHILD, 10–20 mg/kg daily until a few days after clinical cure 
and negative slit-skin smear.  The treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis by 
L. braziliensis requires 20 mg/kg daily, until lesion has healed and for at least 
4 weeks; relapse may occur due to inadequate dosage or interrupted 
treatment; relapse after full course of treatment  requires treatment with 
pentamidine (see below).   

Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (infections caused by L. braziliensis), by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 20 mg/kg daily until slit-skin 
smears are negative and for at least 4 weeks; if inadequate response, 10–
15 mg/kg every 12 hours for same period; if relapse, retreat for at least 
twice as long; if unresponsive to treatment, treat with pentamidine or 
amphotericin B (see below).   

Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis (infections caused by L. amazonensis), by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 20 mg/kg daily for several months 
after clinical improvement occurs; relapse must be expected until immunity 
develops.   

ADMINISTRATION. Meglumine antimoniate may be given by deep intramuscular 
injection (if the volume of injection exceeds 10 ml, it should be divided in 2 doses: one 
in each buttock or thigh) or by slow intravenous injection (over at least 5 minutes). It 
may also be administered intralesionally. 

Adverse effects: anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, ECG changes 
(possibly requiring dose reduction or withdrawal), cough; headache, lethargy, 
arthralgia, myalgia; raised liver enzymes; renal function impairment; rarely 
anaphylaxis, fever, sweating, flushing, substernal pain, vertigo, bleeding 
from nose or gums, jaundice, and biochemical (frequent) or clinical (rare) 
pancreatitis, rash; pain and thrombosis on intravenous administration; pain 
on intramuscular injection. 

 

184 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Paromomycin 
Solution for intramuscular injection: 750 mg of paromomycin base present as 
the sulfate. 

NOTE. 11 mg paromomycin base is approximately equivalent to 15 mg paromomycin 
sulfate. 

Uses: visceral leishmaniasis unresponsive to antimonial compounds. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to aminoglycosides; previous course of 
paromomycin treatment in preceding 3 months; concurrent administration 
of nephrotoxic or ototoxic drugs including aminoglycosides; renal 
impairment (Appendix 4). 

Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  

NOTE.  

All doses are in terms of paromomycin base. 

Visceral leishmaniasis (unresponsive to antimonial compounds), by intramuscular injection, 
ADULT and CHILD over 5 kg, 11 mg/kg daily for 21 days. 

Adverse effects: injection site reactions including pain and swelling; raised 
aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase; pyrexia; 
ototoxicity (reversible at recommended dosage), vomiting, proteinuria, 
raised alkaline phosphatase and blood bilirubin; nephrotoxicity and 
neurotoxicity including numbness, skin tingling, and muscle twitching; 
convulsions reported with concomitant use of aminoglycosides; 
neuromuscular blockage and respiratory paralysis reported following high 
doses of concomitant aminoglycosides. 

Pentamidine 
Powder for injection: 200 mg; 300 mg (isetionate) in vial. 

Pentamidine is a complementary list antiprotozoal and antipneumocystis medicine.  

Uses: leishmaniasis; African trypanosomiasis (section 6.5.5.1); Pneumocystis 
carinii (Pneumocystis jiroveci) pneumonia (section 6.5.4). 

Contraindications: severe renal impairment. 
Precautions: risk of severe hypotension following administration (establish 
baseline blood pressure and administer with patient lying down); monitor 
blood pressure during administration and treatment period; hypotension or 
hypertension; hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia; hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, anaemia; immunodeficiency 
(interrupt or discontinue if acute deterioration in bone marrow, renal, or 
pancreatic function); renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (in 
potentially fatal visceral leishmaniasis, treat without delay; Appendix 2) and 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 185 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

breastfeeding (Appendix 3); carry out laboratory monitoring according to 
manufacturer’s recommendations; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Visceral leishmaniasis (unresponsive to, or intolerant of, antimonial 
compounds), by deep intramuscular injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT and 
CHILD, 4 mg/kg 3 times a week for 5–25 weeks or longer, until 
2 consecutive splenic aspirates taken 14 days apart are negative. 

Cutaneous leishmaniasis (infections caused by L. aethiopica, L. guyanensis), by deep 
intramuscular injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, 3–4 mg/kg 
once or twice a week until the lesion is no longer visible; relapse is unusual. 

Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis (infections caused by L. aethiopica), by deep 
intramuscular injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, 3–4 mg/kg 
once a week, continued for at least 4 months after parasites no longer 
detectable in slit-skin smears; relapse frequent during first few months until 
immunity established. 

Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis unresponsive to antimonial compounds, by deep 
intramuscular injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, 4 mg/kg 3 
times a week for 5–25 weeks or longer, until lesion is no longer visible. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. Deep intramuscular injection is the preferred route of administration. 
Pentamidine is toxic; care is required in order to protect personnel during handling and 
administration. 

Adverse effects: nephrotoxicity; acute hypotension — with dizziness, 
headache, breathlessness, tachycardia and syncope — following rapid 
intravenous injection; hypoglycaemia (may be followed by hyperglycaemia 
and type I diabetes mellitus); pancreatitis; also hypocalcaemia, 
gastrointestinal disturbances, confusion, hallucinations, arrhythmias; 
thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, abnormal liver function tests; anaemia; 
hyperkalaemia; rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome reported; pain, 
local induration, sterile abscess, and muscle necrosis at injection site. 

6.5.3 Antimalarial medicines 

Malaria, which is transmitted by anopheline mosquitoes, is caused by four 
species of plasmodial parasites. Plasmodium vivax is extensively distributed. 
P. falciparum is also widespread, and causes the most severe infections which 
are responsible for nearly all malaria-related deaths. P. ovale is mainly confined 
to Africa and is less prevalent, while P. malariae, which causes the least severe 
but most persistent infections, also occurs widely.  

186 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Certain tissue forms of P. vivax and P. ovale which persist in the liver for many 
months and even years are responsible for relapses. Such latent forms are not 
generated by P. falciparum or P. malariae. Recrudescence of these infections 
results from persistent blood forms in inadequately treated or untreated 
patients.  

6.5.3.1  For curative treatment 

Blood schizontocides, which suppress malaria by destroying the asexual blood 
forms of the parasites, are the mainstay of the treatment of acute malaria;  
some are used for prophylaxis (see section 6.5.3.2). They include the  
4-aminoquinolines (amodiaquine and chloroquine), the related 
arylaminoalcohols (mefloquine and quinine), and artemisinin and its 
derivatives (artemether and artesunate). Blood schizontocides are not active 
against intrahepatic forms and therefore they do not eliminate infections 
caused by P. vivax and P. ovale.  
Combinations of some antimetabolites act synergistically. For example, a 
combination of pyrimethamine + sulfadoxine is an effective blood 
schizontocide; on their own, these substances are of little value because they 
act only slowly. Some antibiotics (for example, the tetracyclines, and 
doxycycline in particular) are blood schizontocides; the tetracyclines are used 
primarily as adjuncts to quinine where multidrug-resistant P. falciparum is 
prevalent.  

Treatment of falciparum malaria 
To reduce the risk of P. falciparum resistance, two or more blood 
schizontocides with different mechanisms of action should be used in 
combination to treat falciparum malaria (one of which should be an 
artemisinin derivative). The following artemisinin-based combinations are 
recommended for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria:  

- artemether + lumefantrine,  

- artesunate with amodiaquine,  

- artesunate with mefloquine,  

- artesunate with sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine.  
The most appropriate combination will depend on the levels of resistance and 
tolerance to individual drugs in a particular area. For example, in areas with 
multidrug resistant P. falciparum, artesunate with mefloquine or artemether + 
lumefantrine are the combinations of choice; in Africa, where there are 
concerns about the tolerability of mefloquine in children, artemether + 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 187 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

lumefantrine, artesunate with amodiaquine, and artesunate with sulfadoxine + 
pyrimethamine might be more appropriate. Patients should be advised on the 
importance of adhering to their prescribed regimen for the full duration of the 
course to ensure the most effective treatment. 
Treatment failure more than 14 days after completion or commencement of 
initial treatment can be retreated with the same artemisinin-based combination 
(if mefloquine was included in the initial treatment, treat as a failure within 
14  days, as below). If treatment failure occurs within 14 days of initial treatment, 
one of the following regimens may be suitable:  

- a different artemisinin-based combination known to be effective in the 
region;  

- artesunate (2 mg/kg once daily) in combination with either doxycycline 
(3.5 mg/kg once daily) or clindamycin (10 mg/kg twice daily) or tetracycline 
(4 mg/kg 4 times a day) [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] for 
7 days;  

- quinine (10 mg/kg 3 times a day) in combination with either doxycycline 
dose or clindamycin dose or tetracycline dose [not included on the 15th 
WHO Model List] for 7 days.  

For travellers returning to non-endemic countries, one of the following 
regimens may be suitable (note that if malaria chemoprophylaxis was taken, a 
different drug should be used for treatment): 

- artemether + lumefantrine (see under Artemether + lumefantrine for dose);  

- quinine (10 mg/kg every 8 hours) in combination with either doxycycline 
(3.5 mg/kg once daily) or clindamycin (10 mg/kg twice daily), for 7 days 
each;  

- atovaquone (15 mg/kg) with proguanil (6 mg/kg once daily for 3 days; 
usual adult dose, 4 tablets once daily for 3 days) [not included on the 15th 
WHO Model List].     

Pregnancy and breastfeeding 

In the first trimester of pregnancy, quinine in combination with clindamycin 
for 7 days is the treatment of choice; this combination can be used throughout 
pregnancy. If clindamycin is not available, then quinine should be given as 
monotherapy. In the second and third trimesters, an artemisinin-based 
combination therapy or artesunate and clindamycin can be given for 7 days. 
Breastfeeding women should receive standard antimalarial treatment (including 
artemisinin-based combination therapy), but not regimens that include 
tetracyclines or dapsone. 

188 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Treatment of severe cases 

Treatment of severe falciparum malaria requires either parenteral artemether or 
artesunate, or parenteral quinine. Intravenous artesunate is the drug of choice 
in low to moderate transmission areas, or outside malaria endemic areas.  
Parenteral antimalarials are also used to initiate treatment in patients unable to 
take oral treatment. The risk of death in severe malaria is greatest in the first 
24 hours; it is therefore recommended that the first dose of parenteral 
treatment be given before referral to a health facility. Rectal preparations of 
artesunate or artemisinin [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] may be 
used as alternatives before transfer to a health facility for parenteral treatments. 
Combination antimalarial treatment should start as soon as patients are able to 
take oral medication.  
Fever and vomiting associated with acute malaria should be treated with an 
antipyretic (for example, paracetamol, section 2.1) and an antiemetic 
(section 17.2) as appropriate.  

HIV infection 

Patients with HIV infection who develop malaria should receive standard 
antimalarial treatment regimens.  The use of sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine 
should be avoided in HIV-infected patients receiving sulfamethoxazole with 
trimethoprim for prophylaxis against opportunistic infection with Pneumocystis 
carinii (see section 6.5.4) because of the increased risk of adverse reactions to 
sulfonamides. 

Benign malarias 
Chloroquine is the drug of choice for P. vivax infection; primaquine is added 
for a radical cure (to destroy parasites in the liver and thus prevent relapses). 
Alternatives in chloroquine-resistant areas include amodiaquine or an 
artemisinin derivative or mefloquine, in all cases followed by primaquine for 
radical cure. Severe or complicated vivax malaria is treated as severe falciparum 
malaria. 
Malaria caused by infection with P. ovale or P. malariae is generally treated with 
chloroquine. For radical cure of P. ovale, primaquine is added as for vivax 
malaria.  

Pregnancy 

In pregnant patients with P. vivax or P. ovale infection, radical cure with 
primaquine should be postponed until after delivery; chloroquine at a dose of 
600 mg (as the base) weekly can be given until then.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 189 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Malaria epidemics 
In malaria epidemics, artemisinin-based combinations are the recommended 
treatment (except in countries in Central America and in the Island form of 
Hispaniola, where chloroquine and sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine still have 
high efficacy against P. falciparum). For chloroquine-sensitive P. vivax epidemics, 
the recommended treatment is chloroquine (25 mg/kg divided over 3 days) in 
combination with primaquine (250 micrograms/kg daily for 14 days; 
500 micrograms/kg daily for 14 days in Oceania and south-east Asia). When 
artemisinin-based combinations are not available during epidemics, the most 
effective alternative should be used until they become available. 

Pregnancy 

For severe malaria in pregnancy during an epidemic, intravenous artesunate is 
the treatment of choice; the preferred alternative is intramuscular artemether. 
Chloroquine, a rapidly-acting schizontocide, is well tolerated, safe, and 
inexpensive. It can be used to treat malaria wherever the parasites remain 
susceptible. However, widespread resistance has limited its value in the 
treatment of falciparum malaria. Chloroquine-resistant strains of P. vivax have 
been reported in parts of Oceania, Indonesia, East Timor, and Peru. P. malariae 
and P. ovale remain fully sensitive to chloroquine.  
Amodiaquine is used in combination with other antimalarials for the treatment 
of uncomplicated P. falciparum infection (see below); however, cross-resistance 
with chloroquine exists in some areas. Hepatitis and blood disorders were 
reported when amodiaquine was used for prophylaxis of malaria; patients 
should be told how to recognize the symptoms of these conditions and 
advised to seek medical help if they occur.  
The combination of sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine is also used in combination 
with other antimalarials for the treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum 
infection (see below). Resistance to sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine is now 
widespread, particularly in south-east Asia and South America, to a lesser 
extent, in east and central Africa. Because sulfonamides are associated with 
haemolysis and methaemoglobinaemia in neonates, quinine is preferred for 
chloroquine-resistant malaria during pregnancy (see below).  
Mefloquine resistance is common in Cambodia, Myanmar, and Thailand, and 
has occurred in the Amazon region of South America and occasionally in 
Africa. A parenteral preparation is not available and thus it is suitable only for 
patients who can take drugs by mouth. It is generally well tolerated but some 
adverse effects have been reported (see Mefloquine below).  
Quinine, given orally, is used in combination with clindamycin or doxycycline 
to treat relapses of P. falciparum infections which occur within 14 days of 
treatment and are likely to be unresponsive to other drugs. Resistance to 

190 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

quinine was, until recently, rare, but the prevalence of resistant strains is now 
increasing in parts of south-east Asia and South America. Doxycycline, which 
is an effective oral blood schizontocide, is given with quinine except in 
pregnant women and children under 8 years.  
Preparations of artemisinin or its derivatives (artemether or artesunate) are 
used in combination with other antimalarial drugs for the treatment of 
falciparum malaria. When given alone or in combination with other rapidly 
eliminated antimalarials a 7-day course is required, but when given in 
combination with slowly eliminated antimalarials, a 3-day course is effective. 
They should not be used in the first trimester of pregnancy, except where no 
other effective antimalarial medicine is available. Parenteral artemether or 
artesunate are effective alternatives to quinine for the treatment of severe 
falciparum malaria and are preferred in areas with decreased efficacy of quinine. 
A fixed-dose oral formulation of artemether + lumefantrine is available for 
the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria; the combination is not for 
use in the first trimester of pregnancy. Oral multidrug therapy in blister packs 
is available for artesunate and amodiaquine, artesunate and mefloquine, and 
artesunate and sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine. 

Amodiaquine 
Tablet: 153 mg or 200 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Uses: treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. falciparum in 
combination with other antimalarial drugs (see also introductory note 
above). 

Contraindications: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); blood disorders; 
retinopathy. 

Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); G6PD 
deficiency; avoid concurrent therapy with hepatotoxic drugs; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Patients and their carers should be told how to recognize the 
signs of blood disorders and advised to seek medical attention as soon as possible if 
symptoms such as fever, sore throat, rash, mouth ulcers, purpura, bruising, or bleeding 
develop. They should also be told how to recognize signs of hepatitis and advised to 
seek medical attention if symptoms such as anorexia, abnormal weight loss, asthenia, 
abdominal pains, fever, nausea, or vomiting develop. 
Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of amodiaquine base. 

Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria (in combination with other 
antimalarial drugs), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 5 months, 10 mg/kg 
daily for 3 days. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 191 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: blood disorders including leukopenia and agranulocytosis; 
hepatitis; gastrointestinal disturbances, visual disturbances (retinopathy 
associated with long-term, high-dose therapy); rarely rash, pruritus, skin 
pigmentation, and neuromyopathy. 

Artemether 
Oily injection: 80 mg/ml in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: treatment of severe P. falciparum malaria in areas where quinine is 
ineffective (see also introductory note above). 

Contraindications: first trimester of pregnancy (Appendix 2). 
Precautions:  
SKILLED TASKS. Dizziness may impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, 
operating machinery or driving.  
Dose:  
Treatment of severe P. falciparum malaria (in areas of quinine resistance), by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD over 6 months, loading dose of 
3.2 mg/kg, then 1.6 mg/kg daily until patient can tolerate oral medication 
or up to a maximum of 7 days; this is followed by a single dose of oral 
mefloquine 15 mg/kg (occasionally, 25 mg/kg if necessary) to effect a 
radical cure.  

ADMINISTRATION. Since small volumes are required for children, a 1-ml syringe 
should be used to ensure correct dosage. 

Adverse effects: headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea; 
dizziness, tinnitus, neutropenia, elevated liver enzyme values; cardiotoxicity 
(after high doses); neurotoxicity (in animal studies). 

Artemether + lumefantrine 
Tablet: 20 mg + 120 mg. 

Uses: treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. falciparum alone or with 
other Plasmodium spp. in areas with significant drug resistance (see also 
introductory note above). 

Contraindications: breastfeeding (Appendix 3); history of arrhythmias, 
clinically relevant bradycardia, or congestive heart failure accompanied by 
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction; family history of sudden death or 
congenital prolongation of QT interval (see also Precautions). 

Precautions: first trimester of pregnancy (Appendix 2); electrolyte disturbances; 
concomitant administration of drugs that prolong the QT interval; monitor 
patients unable to take food (greater risk of recrudescence); severe renal 

192 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. Dizziness may impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, 
operating machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria:  
by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 12 years/body weight over 35 kg, initially 
4 tablets followed by 5 further doses of 4 tablets each at 8, 24, 36, 48, and 
60 hours (total, 24 tablets over 60 hours);  
CHILD  
body weight 5–14 kg, initially 1 tablet followed by 5 further doses of 1 

tablet each at 8, 24, 36, 48, and 60 hours (total, 6 tablets over 60 hours);  
body weight 15–24 kg, initially 2 tablets followed by 5 further doses of 

2 tablets each at 8, 24, 36, 48, and 60 hours (total, 12 tablets over 
60 hours);  

body weight 25–34 kg, initially 3 tablets followed by 5 further doses of 
3 tablets each at 8, 24, 36, 48, and 60 hours (total, 18 tablets over 
60 hours). 

PATIENT ADVICE. Take tablets with food; repeat dose if vomiting occurs within 
1 hour of administration. 

Adverse effects: abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting; 
headache, dizziness, sleep disorders; palpitation; arthralgia, myalgia; cough; 
asthenia, fatigue; pruritus, rash. 

Artesunate 
Injection: ampoules, containing 60 mg anhydrous artesunic acid with a 
separate ampoule of 5% sodium bicarbonate solution.  
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Uses: treatment of uncomplicated malaria caused by P. falciparum in 
combination with other antimalarials (see also introductory note above); 
treatment of severe malaria in areas where quinine is ineffective. 

Contraindications: first trimester of pregnancy (Appendix 2). 
Precautions: risk of recurrence if used alone in non-immune patients. 
SKILLED TASKS. Dizziness may impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, 
operating machinery or driving. 
Dose:  

Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria (in combination with other 
antimalarial drugs):  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 193 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 5 months, 4 mg/kg daily for 3 days;  
by intravenous or intramuscular injection, ADULT, initially 2.4 mg/kg, then 
repeated at 12-hour intervals for 2 further doses, then once daily. 

RECONSTITUTION. Artesunic acid should be dissolved in sodium bicarbonate 5% 
solution for injection (to form sodium artesunate), and then further diluted in 5 ml of 
glucose 5% solution for injection before administration; solutions should be freshly 
prepared prior to administration. Consult manufacturer’s literature for further 
information. 

Adverse effects: headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, 
dizziness, tinnitus, neutropenia, elevated liver enzyme values; ECG 
abnormalities including prolongation of the QT interval; temporary 
suppression of reticulocyte response and induction of blackwater fever, 
reported; neurotoxicity (in animal studies). 

Chloroquine 
Oral liquid: 50 mg (as phosphate or sulfate)/5 ml. 
Tablet: 100 mg; 150 mg (as phosphate or sulfate). 

Uses: treatment of acute malaria caused by P. malariae, P. vivax, and P. ovale 
(followed in P. vivax and P. ovale infections by primaquine to eliminate 
intrahepatic forms; see also introductory note above); prophylaxis of 
malaria (see section 6.5.3.2); rheumatic disorders (section 2.4). 

Precautions: if patient continues to deteriorate after chloroquine — suspect 
resistance and administer quinine intravenously as emergency measure; 
hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (but in acute malaria, benefit is usually considered to outweigh 
risk; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); may exacerbate psoriasis; 
neurological disorders; may aggravate myasthenia gravis; severe 
gastrointestinal disorders; G6PD deficiency; avoid concurrent therapy with 
hepatotoxic drugs; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of chloroquine base.  

Treatment of acute malaria, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 10 mg/kg followed by 
5 mg/kg 6–8 hours later, then 5 mg/kg daily on next 2 days or 10 mg/kg 
for 2 days, followed by 5 mg/kg daily on day 3 (total dose, 25 mg/kg over 
3 days).  

PATIENT ADVICE. Oral chloroquine should be taken after meals to minimize nausea 
and vomiting; if part or all a dose is vomited, the same amount must be readministered 
immediately.  

194 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Adverse effects: headache, gastrointestinal disturbances; also convulsions; 
visual disturbances (retinopathy associated with long-term, high-dose 
therapy or inappropriate self-medication); depigmentation or loss of hair; 
rash; pruritus (may become intolerable); bone marrow suppression; 
hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria and angioedema; 
atrioventricular block (may be result of inappropriate self-medication); 
porphyria and psoriasis in susceptible individuals.  

Doxycycline 
Capsule: 100 mg (as hydrochloride). 
Tablet (dispersible): 100 mg (as monohydrate). 

Doxycycline is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of malaria. 

Uses: supplement to quinine or artesunate treatment for multidrug-resistant 
P. falciparum malaria; short-term prophylaxis of multidrug-resistant 
P. falciparum malaria (section 6.5.3.1; see also introductory note above); 
bacterial infections (section 6.2.2); moderate acne (section 13.5). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); children under 8 years; porphyria; 
systemic lupus erythematosus. 

Precautions: avoid exposure to sunlight or sunlamps (risk of photosensitivity 
reactions, see Adverse effects); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose: 
Supplement to quinine or artesunate treatment for multidrug-resistant 
P. falciparum malaria, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 8 years, 100 mg twice 
daily for 7–10 days. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Capsules should be swallowed whole with plenty of fluid while 
sitting or standing to prevent oesophageal irritation. May be given with food or milk to 
counter gastric irritation. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances; anorexia; flushing, tinnitus; 
photosensitivity reactions; hypersensitivity reactions; headache and visual 
disturbances; hepatotoxicity, blood disorders, pancreatitis and antibiotic-
associated colitis reported; staining of growing teeth and occasional dental 
hypoplasia. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 195 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Mefloquine 
Tablet: 250 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Uses: treatment of uncomplicated malaria due to multidrug-resistant 
P. falciparum in combination with other antimalarials (see also introductory 
note above); prophylaxis of malaria (see section 6.5.3.2). 

Contraindications: history of neuropsychiatric disorders including depression 
or convulsions; hypersensitivity to quinine. 

Precautions: pregnancy (use only if other antimalarials are inappropriate; 
Appendix 2); avoid pregnancy during, and for 3 months after, use; cardiac 
conduction disorders; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); not recommended for 
infants under 3 months (5 kg); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Patients should be informed about the adverse effects associated with 
mefloquine and, if they occur, advised to seek medical advice on alternative 
antimalarials. 

SKILLED TASKS. Dizziness may impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, 
operating machinery or driving; effects may persist for up to 3 weeks. 
Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of mefloquine base. 

Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria (in combination with other 
antimalarial drugs), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 25 mg/kg usually given 
over 2–3 days. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, anorexia, 
headache, dizziness (can be severe), loss of balance, somnolence, insomnia 
and abnormal dreams; neurological and psychiatric disturbances including 
sensory and motor neuropathies, tremor, ataxia, visual disturbances, tinnitus, 
and vestibular disorders; convulsions, anxiety, depression, suicidal ideation, 
confusion, hallucinations, panic attacks, emotional instability, aggression, 
agitation and psychoses; circulatory disorders, tachycardia, bradycardia, 
cardiac conduction disorders; muscle weakness, myalgia, arthralgia; rash, 
urticaria, pruritus, alopecia; disturbances in liver function tests, leukopenia, 
leucocytosis, thrombocytopenia; rarely Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
atrioventricular block, and encephalopathy. 

Primaquine 
Tablet: 7.5 mg; 15 mg (as diphosphate). 

Uses: elimination of intrahepatic forms of P. vivax and P. ovale (after standard 
chloroquine therapy); elimination of gametocytes of P. falciparum (after 
standard therapy with a blood schizontocide). 

196 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Contraindications: pregnancy (treatment with primaquine should be delayed 
until after delivery; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); conditions 
that predispose to granulocytopenia (including active rheumatoid arthritis 
and lupus erythematosus). 

Precautions: monitor blood count (if either methaemoglobinaemia or 
haemolysis occurs, withdraw treatment and consult a physician); G6PD 
deficiency (exclude before radical treatment for P. vivax and P. ovale malaria; 
however, this is not necessary before single-dose gametocytocidal 
treatment); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of primaquine base. 

Radical treatment of P. vivax and P. ovale malaria (after standard chloroquine 
therapy), by mouth, ADULT, 250 micrograms/kg daily (or 15 mg daily) for 
14 days; CHILD, 250 micrograms/kg daily for 14 days; in G6PD deficiency, 
ADULT, 750 micrograms/kg once a week for 8 weeks; CHILD,  
500–750 micrograms/kg once a week for 8 weeks. 

Gametocytocidal treatment of P. falciparum malaria (after standard blood 
schizontocide therapy), by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 500–50 micrograms/kg 
as a single dose. 

Adverse effects: anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain; acute 
haemolytic anaemia (frequently in G6PD deficiency); rarely, 
methaemoglobinaemia, haemoglobinuria, agranulocytosis, granulocytopenia 
and leukopenia. 

Quinine 
Injection: 300 mg quinine hydrochloride/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 300 mg (quinine sulfate) or 300 mg (quinine bisulfate). 

Uses: treatment of multidrug-resistant P. falciparum malaria, alone or in 
combination with other antimalarial drugs. 

Contraindications: haemoglobinuria; optic neuritis; tinnitus; myasthenia gravis  
Precautions: atrial fibrillation, conduction defects, or heart block (monitor for 
signs of cardiac toxicity and blood glucose and electrolyte concentrations 
during intravenous use); pregnancy (but in acute malaria, benefit is usually 
considered to out-weigh risk, Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); G6PD deficiency; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. 100 mg of quinine (anhydrous base) or 169 mg quinine bisulfate or 122 mg 
quinine dihydrochloride or 121 mg quinine sulfate.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 197 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

The 300 mg quinine bisulfate tablets provide less quinine than the 300 mg quinine 
sulfate or dihydrochloride tablets. 

Treatment of multidrug-resistant P. falciparum malaria, by mouth, ADULT, 600 mg 
(quinine sulfate) every 8 hours for 3, 7, or 10 days; CHILD, 10 mg/kg 
(quinine sulfate) every 8 hours for 3, 7, or 10 days; duration of treatment 
depends on local susceptibility of P. falciparum and whether or not additional 
antimalarials are used. 

PATIENT ADVICE. If all or part of a dose is vomited within one hour of 
administration, the same amount must be readministered immediately. 

Treatment of multidrug-resistant P. falciparum malaria (in patients unable to 
take quinine by mouth), by slow intravenous infusion (over 4 hours), ADULT, 
initially 20 mg/kg (quinine dihydrochloride), followed by 10 mg/kg (quinine 
dihydrochloride) every 8 hours; CHILD, initially 20 mg/kg (quinine 
dihydrochloride), followed by 10 mg/kg (quinine dihydrochloride) every 
12 hours; initial dose should be halved in patients who have received 
quinine, quinidine or mefloquine during the previous 12–24 hours. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions; 
intravenous injection of quinine is so hazardous that it has been superseded by infusion; 
where facilities for intravenous infusion are unavailable, an appropriate dilution may be 
administered by intramuscular injection. 

Adverse effects: cinchonism (tinnitus, headache, blurred vision, temporary 
blindness, altered auditory acuity, nausea, diarrhoea, hot and flushed skin, 
rash, and confusion); hypersensitivity reactions including angioedema; rarely 
haemorrhage and asthma; hypoglycaemia (especially after parenteral 
administration); renal damage (culminating in acute renal failure and anuria); 
blood disorders; cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and central nervous system 
effects; very toxic in overdosage (immediate medical attention required). 

Sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine 
Tablet: 500 mg + 25 mg. 

Uses: treatment of falciparum malaria in combination with other antimalarials 
(see also introductory note above). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfonamides or pyrimethamine; severe 
hepatic or renal impairment (except where no alternative treatments 
available). 

Precautions: blood disorders (avoid unless specialist supervision is available 
and discontinue immediately if blood disorder occurs); rash, sore throat, 
mouth ulcers, or shortness of breath (withdraw treatment); G6PD 
deficiency; predisposition to folate deficiency; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

198 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Dose:  
Treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria (in combination with other 
antimalarials; see introductory note above), by mouth, ADULT, sulfadoxine 
1.5 g + pyrimethamine 75 mg (3 tablets) as a single dose; CHILD 5–10 kg, 
half  tablet; CHILD 11–20 kg, 1 tablet; CHILD 21–30 kg, 1½ tablets; CHILD 
31–45 kg, 2 tablets, as a single dose. 

Adverse effects: rash, pruritus, slight hair loss; rarely erythema multiforme 
(Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and toxic epidermal necrolysis; gastrointestinal 
disturbances including nausea, vomiting, and stomatitis; rarely hepatitis, 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, megaloblastic anaemia, and purpura 
(withdraw treatment); fatigue, headache, fever, and polyneuritis also 
reported; pulmonary infiltrates such as eosinophilic or allergic alveolitis 
resulting in cough or shortness of breath (withdraw treatment). 

6.5.3.2  For prophylaxis 

No drug regimen gives assured protection to everybody, and indiscriminate 
use of antimalarials can increase the risk of inducing resistance. Avoidance of 
mosquito bites using insect repellents, mosquito nets (preferably impregnated 
with an insecticide), and door and window screens is an important preventative 
strategy.  
When possible, pregnant women should avoid travel to malarious areas; when 
travel is unavoidable effective prophylaxis is essential.  
Chloroquine, which is usually well-tolerated at the required dosage for 
prophylaxis, is preferred where P. falciparum remains fully sensitive. The 
combination of proguanil with chloroquine may overcome mild chloroquine 
resistance (see below). Chloroquine is best started 1 week before exposure, and 
continued for at least 4 weeks after the last exposure in non-immune 
individuals. This is sufficient to ensure elimination of P. falciparum and 
P. malariae, but not of P. vivax and P. ovale, whose residual hepatic forms 
survive. Chloroquine can be used during pregnancy.  
Mefloquine may be used for prophylaxis in areas of high risk or where 
multidrug resistance has been reported. Where possible, prophylaxis should be 
started 2–3 weeks before travel to enable any adverse reactions to be identified 
before exposure (over three quarters of adverse reactions occur by the third 
dose) and should be continued for 4 weeks after last exposure. Mefloquine can 
be used for prophylaxis during the second and third trimesters; it should be 
used in early pregnancy only if alternative drugs are either not available or 
unlikely to be effective and when it is impracticable for the woman to leave the 
endemic area.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 199 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Doxycycline is an alternative to mefloquine in areas of high risk or where 
multidrug resistance has been reported; it should not be given during 
pregnancy.  
Proguanil, a predominantly tissue schizontocide with little blood 
schizontocidal activity, is active against the pre-erythrocytic intrahepatic forms 
of the malaria-causing parasites, particularly P. falciparum. The latent persistent 
liver forms of P. ovale and P. vivax are unresponsive. However, there is 
evidence that proguanil may be effective against P. vivax only immediately after 
the initial infection. P. falciparum resistance to proguanil or related compounds 
can occur in malaria endemic areas and particularly where it has been used for 
mass prophylaxis.  
Proguanil is used for prophylaxis with chloroquine in areas where there is 
resistance to chloroquine but a low risk of infection because it may give some 
protection against P. falciparum and may attenuate symptoms if an attack occurs. 
Proguanil and chloroquine can also be used prophylactically in areas of high 
risk or multi-drug resistance as a third choice where mefloquine or doxycycline 
are not appropriate.  
There is no evidence that proguanil is harmful in prophylactic doses during 
pregnancy. Because of the vulnerability of pregnant women to falciparum 
malaria, it should be used at full prophylactic dosage wherever the disease is 
prevalent and likely to be responsive to proguanil, if chloroquine is not 
available. Proguanil can be given with chloroquine if chloroquine alone is 
unlikely to be effective. Folic acid (5 mg daily) should be given with proguanil 
during pregnancy.  

Intermittent preventative treatment in pregnancy 

Sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine is the recommended drug combination for 
intermittent preventative treatment in pregnancy (IPTp). All pregnant women 
in areas of stable, high malaria transmission should receive at least 2 doses 
(each at least one month apart) of sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine after 
quickening (the first noted movement of the fetus); at least 2 doses are required 
to achieve the optimal benefit in most women, but HIV-infected pregnant 
women should receive the complete 3-dose regimen. 

Chloroquine 
Oral liquid: 50 mg (as phosphate or sulfate)/5 ml.  
Tablet: 150 mg (as phosphate or sulfate). 

Uses: in non-immune individuals at risk alone or in combination with 
proguanil (see also introductory note above); treatment of acute malaria 

200 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

caused by P. malaria, P. vivax, P. ovale (section 6.5.3.1); rheumatic disorders 
(section 2.4). 

Precautions: if patient continues to deteriorate after chloroquine — suspect 
resistance and administer quinine intravenously as emergency measure; 
hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (but in acute malaria, benefit is usually considered to outweigh 
risk; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); may exacerbate psoriasis; 
neurological disorders; may aggravate myasthenia gravis; severe 
gastrointestinal disorders; G6PD deficiency; avoid concurrent therapy with 
hepatotoxic drugs; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of the chloroquine base. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Oral chloroquine should be taken after meals to minimize 
nausea and vomiting; if part or all of a dose is vomited, the same amount must be 
readministered immediately. 

Treatment of acute malaria (in patients unable to take chloroquine by mouth), 
by very slow intravenous infusion (over at least 8 hours), ADULT and CHILD, 
10 mg/kg as an initial dose, then 2 further infusions of 5 mg/kg at 8-hour 
intervals (as soon as patient is able to take chloroquine by mouth, 
discontinue infusions and complete the course with oral preparations total 
dose, 25 mg/kg over 3 days); by intramuscular or by subcutaneous injection (only 
when intravenous infusion facilities not available) ADULT and CHILD, 
2.5 mg/kg every 4 hours or 3.5 mg/kg every 6 hours (until total dose of 
25 mg/kg administered). 

Prophylaxis of malaria, by mouth, ADULT, 300 mg once a week; CHILD, 5 mg/kg 
once a week. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Inform travellers about the importance of taking measures to 
avoid mosquito bites, of taking prophylaxis regularly, and of the need to visit a doctor 
immediately if they fall ill within 1 year, and especially within 3 months, of their return 
from a malaria-endemic area. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 
Avoid rapid parenteral administration (risk of toxic plasma concentrations and fatal 
cardiovascular collapse). 

Adverse effects: headache, gastrointestinal disturbances; also convulsions; 
visual disturbances (retinopathy associated with long-term, high-dose 
therapy or inappropriate self-medication); depigmentation or loss of hair; 
rash; pruritus (may become intolerable); bone marrow suppression; 
hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria and angioedema; 
atrioventricular block (may be result of inappropriate self-medication); 
porphyria and psoriasis in susceptible individuals. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 201 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Doxycycline 
Capsule or tablet: 100 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: short-term prophylaxis of multidrug-resistant P. falciparum malaria (see 
also introductory notes above); adjunct in the treatment of multidrug-
resistant P. falciparum malaria (section 6.5.3.1); bacterial infections 
(section 6.2.2); moderate acne (section 13.5). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); children under 8 years; porphyria; 
systemic lupus erythematosus. 

Precautions: avoid exposure to sunlight or sunlamps (risk of photosensitivity 
reactions; see Adverse effects); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Short-term prophylaxis of malaria, by mouth, ADULT, 100 mg daily for up to 
8 weeks; CHILD over 8 years, 1.5 mg/kg daily for up to 8 weeks; doxycycline 
should be started on the day before exposure and continued for 4 weeks 
after last risk of exposure. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Capsules should be swallowed whole with plenty of fluid while 
sitting or standing to prevent oesophageal irritation. May be given with food or milk to 
counter gastric irritation. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances; anorexia; flushing, tinnitus; 
photosensitivity reactions; hypersensitivity reactions; headache and visual 
disturbances; hepatotoxicity, blood disorders, pancreatitis, and antibiotic-
associated colitis reported; staining of growing teeth and occasional dental 
hypoplasia. 

Mefloquine 
Tablet: 250 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Uses: short-term prophylaxis of multiple-resistant P. falciparum malaria (see also 
introductory note above); treatment of uncomplicated malaria due to 
multiple-resistant P. falciparum (section 6.5.3.1). 

Contraindications: history of neuropsychiatric disorders including depression 
or convulsions; hypersensitivity to quinine. 

Precautions: early pregnancy (use only if other antimalarials are inappropriate; 
Appendix 2), avoid pregnancy during and for 3 months after use; cardiac 
conduction disorders; avoid for prophylaxis in severe hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5) and in epilepsy; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); not 
recommended for infants under 3 months (5 kg); interactions: Appendix 1. 

202 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

NOTE. Patients should be informed about the adverse effects associated with 
mefloquine and, if they occur, advised to seek medical advice on alternative 
antimalarials. 

SKILLED TASKS. Dizziness may impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, 
operating machinery or driving; effects may persist for up to 3 weeks. 
Dose:  
NOTE. All doses are in terms of mefloquine base. 

Prophylaxis of malaria, by mouth, ADULT, 250 mg once a week; CHILD over 5 kg, 
5 mg/kg once a week; prophylaxis should start 1–3 weeks before travel to a 
malaria-endemic area and continue for 4 weeks after the last exposure (see 
also introductory note above). 

PATIENT ADVICE. Inform travellers about the importance of taking measures to 
avoid mosquito bites, of taking prophylaxis regularly, and of the need to visit a doctor 
immediately if they fall ill within 1 year, and especially within 3 months, of their return 
from a malaria-endemic area. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, anorexia, 
headache, dizziness (can be severe), loss of balance, somnolence, insomnia 
and abnormal dreams; neurological and psychiatric disturbances including 
sensory and motor neuropathies, tremor, ataxia, visual disturbances, tinnitus, 
and vestibular disorders; convulsions, anxiety, depression, suicidal ideation, 
confusion, hallucinations, panic attacks, emotional instability, aggression, 
agitation and psychoses; circulatory disorders, tachycardia, bradycardia, 
cardiac conduction disorders; muscle weakness, myalgia, arthralgia; rash, 
urticaria, pruritus, alopecia; disturbances in liver function tests, leukopenia, 
leucocytosis, thrombocytopenia; rarely, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
atrioventricular block, and encephalopathy. 

Proguanil 
Tablet: 100 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: prophylaxis of malaria, in combination with chloroquine. 
Contraindications: use in areas of known resistance to either proguanil or 
pyrimethamine. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (folate supplements 
required, Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Prophylaxis of malaria, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg daily, after food; CHILD under 
1 year, 25 mg daily; CHILD 1–4 years, 50 mg daily; CHILD 5–8 years, 100 mg 
daily; CHILD 9–14 years, 150 mg daily. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 203 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

PATIENT ADVICE. Inform travellers about the importance of taking measures to 
avoid mosquito bites, of taking prophylaxis regularly, and of the need to visit a doctor 
immediately if they fall ill within 1 year, and especially within 3 months, of their return 
from a malaria area. 

Adverse effects: mild gastric intolerance, diarrhoea, constipation; occasional 
mouth ulcers and stomatitis; rarely skin reactions and hair loss, cholestasis, 
vasculitis, and hypersensitivity reactions such as urticaria and angioedema. 

6.5.4  Anti-pneumocystosis and antitoxoplasmosis medicines 

Pneumocystosis 
Pneumocystis carinii (Pneumocystis jiroveci) is classified as a protozoan although 
there is some evidence to suggest that it is a fungus. Pneumocystis carinii 
(P. jiroveci) pneumonia is probably acquired by the airborne route. In otherwise 
healthy persons, it rarely produces signs of infection. However, it is a frequent 
cause of opportunistic infection in immunosuppressed, debilitated, or 
malnourished patients; it is the commonest cause of pneumonia in AIDS and 
the most frequent immediate cause of death in these patients. 
Sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim is the treatment of choice for P. carinii 
(P. jiroveci) pneumonia; it is also used for prophylaxis in high-risk patients. 
Pentamidine is used in patients unresponsive to, or intolerant of, 
sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim. 
The treatment of P. carinii (P. jiroveci) infections must only be undertaken with 
specialist supervision, and where there are appropriate monitoring facilities. 

Toxoplasmosis 
Toxoplasmosis is caused by infection with the protozoan parasite, Toxoplasma 
gondii. Most infections are self-limiting and do not require treatment. However, 
in immunodeficiency, primary infection may result in encephalitis, myocarditis, 
or pneumonitis; impairment of immunity (such as that which occurs in AIDS) 
in a previously infected person, may result in encephalitis or meningo-
encephalitis. Congenital transmission may occur if there is a primary infection 
in early pregnancy or if the mother is immunodeficient. Such cases often result 
in spontaneous abortion, fetal death, or severe congenital disease. Spiramycin 
[not included on the 15th WHO Model List] can reduce transmission of 
maternal infection to the fetus. Ocular toxoplasmosis causes chorioretinitis 
and is often the result of a childhood infection that only becomes apparent in 
adulthood. 

204 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

The treatment of choice for toxoplasmosis is a combination of pyrimethamine 
and sulfadiazine; a folate supplement is also given to counteract the 
megaloblastic anaemia associated with these drugs (see section 10.1). 

Pentamidine 
Tablet: 200 mg; 300 mg. 

Pentamidine is a complementary list antipneumocystosis medicine. 

Uses: Pneumocystis carinii (Pneumocystis jiroveci) pneumonia unresponsive to 
sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim; leishmaniasis (section 6.5.2); African 
trypanosomiasis (section 6.5.5.1). 

Contraindications: severe renal impairment 
Precautions: risk of severe hypotension following administration (establish 
baseline blood pressure and administer with patient lying down); monitor 
blood pressure during administration and treatment period; hypotension or 
hypertension; hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia; hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, anaemia; immunodeficiency (interrupt or discontinue if 
acute deterioration in bone marrow, renal, or pancreatic function); in 
potentially fatal P. carinii (P. jiroveci) pneumonia, treat without delay; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2)] and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); carry out 
laboratory monitoring according to manufacturer’s recommendations; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of P. carinii (P. jiroveci) pneumonia, by slow intravenous infusion or by deep 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 4 mg/kg daily for at least 14 days. 

Prophylaxis of P. carinii (P. jiroveci) pneumonia, by slow intravenous infusion, ADULT 
and CHILD, 4 mg/kg once every 4 weeks; by inhalation of nebulized solution, 
ADULT, 300 mg as a single dose once every 4 weeks; CHILD, 4 mg/kg as a 
single dose once every 4 weeks. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. Pentamidine is toxic; care is required in order to protect personnel during 
handling and administration. 

Adverse effects: nephrotoxicity; acute hypotension — with dizziness, 
headache, breathlessness, tachycardia and syncope — following rapid 
intravenous injection; hypoglycaemia (may be followed by hyperglycaemia 
and type I diabetes mellitus); pancreatitis; also hypocalcaemia, 
gastrointestinal disturbances, confusion, hallucinations, arrhythmias; 
thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, abnormal liver function tests; anaemia; 
hyperkalaemia; rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome reported; pain, 
local induration, sterile abscess, and muscle necrosis at injection site. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 205 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Pyrimethamine 
Tablet: 25 mg. 

Uses: toxoplasmosis (with sulfadiazine); malaria (with sulfadoxine; see 
section 6.5.3.1). 

Contraindications: hepatic (Appendix 5) and renal impairment (Appendix 4). 
Precautions: pregnancy (avoid in first trimester but can be given in later 
pregnancy if danger of congenital transmission; Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); blood counts required with prolonged 
treatment; give folate supplements throughout treatment; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Prevention of congenital transmission of toxoplasmosis (in second and third 
trimesters of pregnancy), by mouth, ADULT, 25 mg daily for 3–4 weeks. 

Treatment of toxoplasmosis in neonates, by mouth, NEONATE, 1 mg/kg daily; if 
neonate has overt disease, continue treatment for 6 months; if neonate is 
without overt disease but was born to a mother infected during pregnancy, 
treat for 4 weeks, followed by further courses if infection is confirmed. 

Treatment of toxoplasmosis in immunodeficiency, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg in 
divided doses on first day, then 75–100 mg daily for at least 6 weeks, 
followed by a suppressive dose of 25–50 mg daily. 

Chorioretinitis, by mouth, ADULT, 75 mg daily for 3 days, then 25 mg daily for 
4 weeks; in unresponsive patients, 50 mg daily for a further 4 weeks. 

NOTE. For the treatment of toxoplasmosis, pyrimethamine must always be taken with 
sulfadiazine. 

Adverse effects: depression of haematopoiesis with high doses; megaloblastic 
anaemia; rash; insomnia; gastrointestinal disturbances. 

Sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim 
Injection: 80 mg + 16 mg/ml in 5-ml and 10-ml ampoules. 

Uses: Pneumocystis carinii (Pneumocystis jiroveci) pneumonia; bacterial infections 
(section 6.2.2). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfonamides or trimethoprim; 
porphyria. 

Precautions: renal impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 5); maintain adequate fluid intake (to 
avoid crystalluria; blood disorders (avoid unless under specialist 
supervision); monitor blood counts and discontinue immediately if blood 
disorder develops; rash (discontinue immediately); predisposition to folate 

206 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

deficiency; the elderly; asthma; G6PD deficiency; pregnancy (Appendix 2) 
and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of P. carinii (P. jiroveci) pneumonia, by mouth or by intravenous infusion, 

ADULT and CHILD, sulfamethoxazole, up to 100 mg/kg daily + 
trimethoprim, up to 20 mg/kg daily in 2–4 divided doses for  
14–21 days. 

Prophylaxis of P. carinii (P. jiroveci) pneumonia, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 
sulfamethoxazole, 25 mg/kg + trimethoprim, 5 mg/kg in 2 divided doses 
on alternate days (3 times a week). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache; hypersensitivity 
reactions including rash, pruritus, photosensitivity reactions, exfoliative 
dermatitis, and erythema nodosum; rarely erythema multiforme (Stevens-
Johnson syndrome) and toxic epidermal necrolysis; systemic lupus 
erythematosus, myocarditis, serum sickness; crystalluria — resulting in 
haematuria, oliguria, and anuria; blood disorders including granulocytopenia, 
agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, purpura (discontinue immediately); liver 
damage, pancreatitis, antibiotic-associated colitis, eosinophilia, cough and 
shortness of breath, pulmonary infiltrates, aseptic meningitis, depression, 
convulsions, ataxia, tinnitus, vertigo, dizziness, hallucinations, and 
electrolyte disturbances also reported; megaloblastic anaemia due to 
trimethoprim. 

6.5.5 Antitrypanosomal medicines 

6.5.5.1  African trypanosomiasis 

African trypanosomiasis, or sleeping sickness, is a protozoan infection which is 
transmitted by Glossina spp. (tsetse flies). Two subspecies of Trypanosoma 
brucei — T. brucei gambiense and T. brucei rhodesiense — produce distinctive clinical 
forms of the disease. The early stage of African trypanosomiasis results from 
infection of the blood stream and lymph nodes. The late meningoencephalitic 
stage results from infection of the central nervous system. Signs of the later 
stage develop within a few weeks in T. brucei rhodesiense infection but only after 
several months or years in T. brucei gambiense infection.  

Treatment of early-stage infections of T. brucei rhodesiense with suramin sodium 
and T. brucei gambiense with pentamidine can be curative if started before the 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 207 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

central nervous system has become involved. In areas where pentamidine 
resistance occurs, suramin sodium may be used for T. brucei gambiense infection. 

Eflornithine is used for the treatment of T. brucei gambiense infection that has 
progressed to meningoencephalitic involvement. Eflornithine is considerably 
less neurotoxic than the alternative, melarsoprol, but requires a more intensive 
administration schedule. If relapse occurs after treatment with eflornithine, a 
course of melarsoprol treatment should be considered.    
Melarsoprol is used in T. brucei rhodesiense patients with meningoencephalitic 
involvement or in T. brucei gambiense patients with meningoencephalitic 
involvement when eflornithine treatment has failed or is unavailable. Several 
treatment regimens for adults and children are currently used in the absence of 
clear evidence that one is better than another. Most treatment regimens have 
low starting doses, which might be preferred for children and debilitated 
patients; these regimens increase to a maximum of 3.6 mg/kg daily and are 
given in short courses of 3–4 days with an interval of 7–10 days. The 
effectiveness of 2.2 mg/kg daily for 10 days has been demonstrated for 
T. brucei gambiense and might be preferred for its conciseness, particularly in 
epidemic situations with limited resources.    
In recent years, an increasing number of melarsoprol treatment failures due to 
drug resistance have been reported in several countries. 
Following treatment of African trypanosomiasis, patients should be followed 
up at 6-month intervals over a period of 24 months. Monitoring of leukocytes, 
total protein content and trypanosome presence in CSF is recommended in 
order to evaluate treatment efficacy. 

Eflornithine 
Injection: 200 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 100-ml bottle. 

Uses: treatment of meningoencephalitic stages of T. brucei gambiense infection. 
Contraindications: pregnancy; breastfeeding. 
Precautions: hospitalization and close supervision required throughout 
treatment; monitor complete blood and platelet counts for signs of bone 
marrow suppression (severe anaemia, leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia 
requires an interruption in treatment until there is evidence of bone marrow 
recovery); renal impairment (Appendix 4). 

Dose:  
Treatment of meningoencephalitic T. brucei gambiense infections, by intravenous 
infusion, ADULT, 100 mg/kg over 45 minutes every 6 hours for 14 days; 
CHILDREN less than 12 years old or under 35 kg, 150 mg/kg over 45 
minutes every 6 hours for 14 days. 

208 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions.  

Adverse effects: diarrhoea, anaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
convulsions; impaired hearing reported; less commonly vomiting, anorexia, 
alopecia, abdominal pain, headache, facial oedema, eosinophilia, and 
dizziness (reversible on treatment withdrawal). 

Melarsoprol 
Injection: 3.6% solution, 5-ml ampoule (180 mg of active compound). 

Uses: treatment of meningoencephalitic stage of T. brucei rhodesiense and 
T. brucei gambiense infections. 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); during influenza epidemics 
(increased risk of reactive encephalopathy in febrile patients). 

Precautions: hospitalization and close medical supervision required 
throughout treatment; episodes of reactive encephalopathy (suspend 
treatment); treat intercurrent infections such as pneumonia and malaria 
before melarsoprol administration; malnutrition (if possible, correct with a 
protein-rich diet); G6PD deficiency; leprosy (may precipitate erythema 
nodosum). 

Dose:  

Treatment of T. brucei rhodesiense and T. brucei gambiense with meningo-
encephalitic involvement (see note above), by slow intravenous injection, ADULT 
and CHILD, dose gradually increased from 1.2 mg/kg to maximum of 
3.6 mg/kg daily in courses of 3–4 days with intervals of 7–10 days between 
courses; alternatively for T. brucei gambiense infection, 2.2 mg/kg daily for 
10 days. 

ADMINISTRATION. Injection is very irritant (avoid extravasation). Patients should 
remain supine and fast for at least 5 hours after injection. 

Adverse effects: fatal reactive encephalopathy characterized by headache, 
tremor, slurred speech, convulsions, and ultimately coma (occurs in 3–8% 
of patients, usually at the end of the first 3–4 days of treatment); myocardial 
damage; albuminuria; hypertension; hypersensitivity reactions; 
agranulocytosis; dose-related renal and hepatic impairment; hyperthermia, 
urticaria, headache, diarrhoea, and vomiting (more common in late stage of 
treatment). 

 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 209 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Pentamidine 
Powder for injection: 200 mg (pentamidine isetionate) in vial. 

Uses: treatment of haemolymphatic stage of T. brucei gambiense infection; 
adjunct to melarsoprol in meningoencephalitic stage of T. brucei gambiense 
infection; leishmaniasis (section 6.5.2); Pneumocystis carinii (Pneumocystis jiroveci) 
pneumonia (section 6.5.4). 

Contraindications: severe renal impairment; T. brucei rhodesiense infection (since 
primary resistance has been observed). 

Precautions: examine cerebrospinal fluid before treatment (pentamidine is not 
likely to be effective if leukocyte count is greater than 5 cells/mm3, total 
protein is greater than 37 mg/100 ml, or trypanosomes are detected in 
centrifuge deposits); risk of severe hypotension following administration 
(establish baseline blood pressure and administer with patient lying down); 
monitor blood pressure during administration and treatment period; 
hypotension or hypertension; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia; leukopenia; thrombocytopenia; anaemia; 
immunodeficiency (interrupt or discontinue if acute deterioration in bone 
marrow, or in renal or pancreatic function); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (however, treatment should not be withheld, even if there is 
evidence of meningoencephalitic involvement, as melarsoprol is 
contraindicated; Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of haemolymphatic stage of T. brucei gambiense infection, by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 4 mg/kg daily or on alternate days 
for a total of 7–10 doses. 

Treatment of meningoencephalitic stage of T. brucei gambiense (prior to 
melarsoprol), by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 4 mg/kg daily on 
days one and two. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. Pentamidine is toxic; care is required in order to protect personnel during 
handling and administration. 

Adverse effects: nephrotoxicity; acute hypotension; hypoglycaemia (may be 
followed by hyperglycaemia and type I diabetes mellitus); pancreatitis; also 
hypocalcaemia, gastrointestinal disturbances, confusion, hallucinations, 
arrhythmias; thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, abnormal liver function tests; 
anaemia; hyperkalaemia; rash including Stevens-Johnson syndrome reported; 
pain, local induration, sterile abscess, and muscle necrosis at injection site. 

 

210 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

Suramin sodium 
Powder for injection: 1 g in vial. 

Uses: treatment of haemolymphatic stage of T. brucei rhodesiense infections; 
onchocerciasis (section 6.1.2). 

Contraindications: previous anaphylaxis or suramin sensitivity; severe liver  
(Appendix 5) or renal function impairment (Appendix 4); the elderly or 
debilitated. 

Precautions: administer only under close medical supervision in hospital and 
with general condition of patient improved as far as possible before 
treatment; first dose (possible loss of consciousness; see under Dose, 
below); maintain satisfactory food and fluid intake during treatment; urine 
tests before and weekly during treatment (reduce dose if moderate 
albuminuria, discontinue immediately if severe albuminuria or casts in 
urine); pregnancy (however, treatment should not be withheld, even if there 
is evidence of meningoencephalitic involvement, as melarsoprol is 
contraindicated; Appendix 2). 

Dose:  

Treatment of haemolymphatic T. brucei rhodesiense and T. brucei gambiense 
infections, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT and CHILD, 5 mg/kg on day 1, 
10 mg/kg on day 3, and 20 mg/kg on days 5, 11, 17, 23, and 30. 

RECONSTITUTION OF INJECTION. Reconstitute in water for injections to 
produce a final concentration of 10%. 

FIRST (TEST) DOSE. Administer first dose with particular caution; wait at least 1 
minute after injecting the first few microlitres; inject the next 0.5 ml over 30 seconds 
and wait 1 minute; inject the remainder over several minutes. 

Adverse effects: rarely immediate and potentially fatal reaction with nausea, 
vomiting, shock, and loss of consciousness during first dose (see note 
above); albuminuria; abdominal pain; severe diarrhoea; stomal ulceration; 
exfoliative dermatitis; fever; tiredness; anorexia; malaise; polyuria; thirst; 
raised liver enzyme values; paraesthesia and hyperaesthesia of palms and 
soles. 

6.5.5.2  American trypanosomiasis 

American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) is caused by the protozoan parasite 
Trypanosoma cruzi, which is carried by reduviid or triatomine bugs that feed on 
human blood. The acute febrile phase of the disease frequently passes 
unrecognized. Occasionally, however, infection follows a fulminating course, 
terminating in a fatal myocarditis and meningoencephalitis. In about half of the 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 211 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

surviving cases, and after a latent interval ranging from 10 to more than 
20 years, chronic myopathy degeneration results in arrhythmias, cardiac 
enlargement and, less frequently, oesophageal and colonic dilatation. At this 
stage, only symptomatic treatment is of benefit.  
At present, the only therapeutic agents of value are benznidazole and 
nifurtimox. Both suppress parasitaemia and are efficacious during the early 
stages of infection.  
Safe use of both of these drugs in pregnancy has not been established and 
treatment should be deferred until after the first trimester. At this juncture, 
treatment should be instituted immediately to avoid the risk of congenital 
transmission.  
Studies are in progress to determine whether benznidazole and nifurtimox 
have any influence on the later manifestations of the disease. Symptomatic 
treatment may be necessary in advanced cases. 

Benznidazole 
Tablet: 100 mg. 

Uses: acute American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease). 
Contraindications: early pregnancy (Appendix 2). 
Precautions: hepatic, renal, or haematological insufficiency (require close 
medical supervision); monitor blood count, especially leukocytes, 
throughout treatment. 

Dose:  

Acute American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease), by mouth, ADULT,  
5–7 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 60 days; CHILD up to 12 years, 
10 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 60 days. 

Adverse effects: rash (if severe and accompanied by fever and purpura, 
discontinue treatment); nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain; dose-related 
paraesthesia and peripheral neuritis (discontinue treatment); leukopenia; 
rarely agranulocytosis. 

Nifurtimox 
Tablet: 30 mg; 120 mg; 250 mg. 

Uses: acute American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease). 
Contraindications: early pregnancy (Appendix 2). 
Precautions: history of convulsions or psychiatric disease (requires close 
medical supervision); avoid alcohol to reduce incidence and severity of 

212 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



6. Anti-infective medicines 

adverse effects; co-administer aluminium hydroxide to reduce 
gastrointestinal irritation. 

Dose:  

Acute American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease), by mouth, ADULT,  
8–10 mg/kg daily in 3 divided doses for 90 days; CHILD, 15–20 mg/kg daily 
in 4 divided doses for 90 days. 

Adverse effects: anorexia, loss of weight, nausea, vomiting, gastric pain, 
insomnia, headache, vertigo, excitability, myalgia, arthralgia; dose-related 
convulsions (reduce dose); peripheral neuritis (may require discontinuation); 
rash and other allergic reactions. 

 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 213 



7. Antimigraine medicines 

 

 

 

SECTION 7:  
Antimigraine medicines 

 

7.1 For treatment of acute attack 215 

7.2 For prophylaxis 217 

214 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



7. Antimigraine medicines 

Chronic recurrent headache is associated with many disorders, both somatic 
and psychogenic. An accurate diagnosis must consequently be made before 
appropriate treatment can be initiated for migraine. Untreated, migraine attacks 
last for several hours and sometimes for as long as 3 days. 
Migraine headache is frequently accompanied by gastrointestinal disturbance 
including nausea and vomiting. The headache may be preceded or 
accompanied by aura (classical migraine), which is characterized by visual 
disturbances such as flickering lines and fragmented vision or sensory 
disturbances such as tingling or numbness; rarely hemiparesis or impaired 
consciousness may occur. Migraine without aura (common migraine) is the 
more common form, occurring in about 75% of patients who experience 
migraine. 
Emotional or physical stress, lack of or excess sleep, missed meals, 
menstruation, alcohol, and specific foods (including cheese and chocolate) are 
often identified as precipitating factors; oral contraceptives may increase the 
frequency of attacks. Avoidance of precipitating factors can prevent or reduce 
the frequency of attacks. Women taking combined oral contraceptives who 
experience an onset or increase in frequency of headaches should be advised 
of other contraceptive measures. 
The two principal strategies of migraine management are treatment of acute 
attacks and prevention of attacks (prophylaxis). 

7.1 For treatment of acute attack 

Treatment of acute attacks may be non-specific using simple analgesics; if 
nausea and vomiting are features of the attack, an antiemetic drug may be 
given. Treatment is generally by mouth; some drugs are available as 
suppositories which may be used if the oral route is either not effective (oral 
bioavailability is poor, or absorption from the gut is impaired by vomiting), or 
not practicable (patient is unable to take drugs orally). Excessive use of 
antimigraine medication which include analgesics, 5HT1 agonists [not included 
on the 15th WHO Model List] and ergotamine [not included on the 15th 
WHO Model List]) is associated with medication-overuse headache (analgesic-
induced headache); therefore, increasing consumption of these medicines 
needs careful management. 
Simple analgesics can be effective in mild to moderate forms of migraine if 
taken early in the attack; most migraine headaches respond to paracetamol 
(acetaminophen), acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) or other non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory medicines (NSAIMs), such as ibuprofen (see section 2.1)  
(see also attached notes). Peristalsis is often reduced during migraine attacks 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 215 



7. Antimigraine medicines 

and, if available, a dispersible or effervescent preparation of the drug is 
preferred because of enhanced absorption compared with a conventional 
tablet. The risk of Reye syndrome due to acetylsalicylic acid in children under 
16 years can be avoided by giving paracetamol instead. 
An antiemetic, such as metoclopramide, given as a single dose of 10–20 mg 
orally or by intramuscular injection at the onset of a migraine attack, preferably  
10–15 minutes before the analgesic, is useful not only in relieving nausea but 
also in restoring gastric motility, thus improving absorption of the analgesic 
(see also section 17.2). 

Specific antimigraine drugs, such as the 5HT1 agonist, sumatriptan [not 
included on the 15th WHO Model List], are used when analgesics are 
ineffective; they act on the 5HT (serotonin) 1B/1D receptors and can be used 
during the established headache phase of an attack.  
Ergot alkaloids should no longer be used in the treatment of migraine; they are 
associated with many side-effects and must be avoided in cerebrovascular or 
cardiovascular disease. Products which contain barbiturates or codeine are also 
undesirable since they may cause physical dependence and withdrawal 
headaches. 

Acetylsalicylic acid 
Tablet: 300–500 mg. 

Also known as Aspirin. 

Uses: acute migraine attacks; tension headache; pyrexia, mild to moderate pain 
and inflammation (section 2.1); antiplatelet (section 12.5). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity (including asthma, angioedema, urticaria, or 
rhinitis) to acetylsalicylic acid or any other NSAIM; children and 
adolescents under 16 years (risk of Reye syndrome, see section 2.1); 
previous or active peptic ulceration; haemophilia and other bleeding 
disorders; not for treatment of gout. 

Precautions: asthma, allergic disease; renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); the elderly; G6PD-deficiency; dehydration; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of acute migraine attack, by mouth preferably with or after food, 

ADULT, 300–900 mg at first sign of attack, repeated every 4–6 hours if 
necessary; maximum, 4 g daily; CHILD under 16 years, not recommended. 

216 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



7. Antimigraine medicines 

Treatment of acute migraine attack, by rectum, ADULT, 600–900 mg inserted at 
first sign of attack, repeated every 4 hours if necessary; maximum, 3.6 g 
daily; CHILD under 16 years, not recommended. 

Adverse effects: generally mild and infrequent but high incidence of 
gastrointestinal irritation with slight asymptomatic blood loss; increased 
bleeding time; bronchospasm and skin reactions in hypersensitive patients; 
for adverse effects associated with higher doses, see also section 2.1. 

Paracetamol 
Tablet: 300–500 mg. 

Also known as Acetaminophen. 

Uses: acute migraine attacks, tension headache; mild to moderate pain, pyrexia 
(section 2.1). 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
alcohol dependence; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); overdosage: section 4.2; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of acute migraine attack, by mouth, ADULT, 0.5–1 g at first sign of 
attack, repeated every 4–6 hours if necessary, maximum, 4 g daily; CHILD  
6–12 years, 250–500 mg at first sign of attack, repeated every 4–6 hours if 
necessary, maximum, 4 doses in 24 hours. 

Treatment of acute migraine attack, by rectum, ADULT and CHILD over 12 years, 
0.5–1 g at first sign of attack, repeated every 4–6 hours if necessary, 
maximum, 4 doses in 24 hours; CHILD 6–12 years, 250–500 mg at first sign 
of attack, repeated every 4–6 hours if necessary, maximum, 4 doses in 
24 hours. 

Adverse effects: rare, but rashes and blood disorders (including 
thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and neutropenia) reported; important: liver 
damage (and less frequently renal damage) following overdosage. 

7.2 For prophylaxis 

Prophylactic treatment for migraine should be considered for patients in 
whom:  

- treatment of acute migraine attacks is ineffective or not possible; 

- the frequency of migraine attacks is increasing;  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 217 



7. Antimigraine medicines 

- migraine attacks occur more than once or twice a month;  

- the severity or duration of migraine attacks is disabling.  
Prophylaxis can reduce the severity and frequency of attacks but does not 
eliminate them completely; additional symptomatic treatment is still needed. 
However, long-term prophylaxis is undesirable and treatment should be 
reviewed at 6-monthly intervals. 
Of the many drugs that have been advocated for migraine prophylaxis, beta-
adrenoceptor antagonists (beta-blockers) are most frequently used. Propranolol, 
a non-selective beta-blocker and other related compounds with a similar 
profile, such as atenolol (see section 12.1), are generally preferred. Tricyclic 
antidepressants, such as amitriptyline (section 24.2.1) or calcium-channel 
blocking drugs such as verapamil (section 12.1) may be of value. 

Propranolol 
Tablet: 20 mg; 40 mg (hydrochloride). 

Propranolol is a representative beta-adrenoceptor antagonist. Various medicines can 
serve as alternatives. 

Uses: prophylaxis of migraine. 
Contraindications: asthma or history of obstructive airway disease, 
uncontrolled heart failure, Prinzmetal angina, marked bradycardia, 
hypotension, sick sinus syndrome, second- or third-degree atrioventricular 
block, cardiogenic shock, metabolic acidosis, or severe peripheral arterial 
disease; phaeochromocytoma. 

Precautions: first-degree atrioventricular block; renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
liver disease (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2), and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); portal hypertension; diabetes mellitus; myasthenia gravis; 
history of hypersensitivity [increased reaction to allergens and reduced 
response to epinephrine (adrenaline)]; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Prophylaxis of migraine, by mouth, ADULT, initially 40 mg 2–3 times daily, 
increased by same amount at weekly intervals if necessary; usual 
maintenance dose is in the range, 80–160 mg daily; CHILD under 12 years, 
20 mg 2–3 times daily. 

Adverse effects: bradycardia, heart failure, hypotension, conduction disorders, 
bronchospasm, peripheral vasoconstriction, exacerbation of intermittent 
claudication and Raynaud phenomenon; gastrointestinal disturbances, 
fatigue, sleep disturbances including nightmares; rarely rash, dry eyes 
(reversible), sexual dysfunction, and exacerbation of psoriasis. 

218 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

 

 

 

SECTION 8:  
Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used 
in palliative care 

 

8.1 Immunosuppressive medicines 220 

8.2 Cytotoxic medicines 223 

8.3 Hormones and antihormones 236 

8.4 Medicines used in palliative care 238 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 219 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

8.1 Immunosuppressive medicines 

NOTE. WHO advises that this class of drugs is for use only when adequate 
resources and specialist care are available. Specific expertise, diagnostic 
precision, individualization of dosage, and special equipment are required for 
their proper use. 
Immunosuppressive drugs are used in organ transplant recipients to suppress 
rejection; they are also used as second-line drugs in chronic inflammatory 
conditions. Treatment should only be initiated by a specialist. Careful 
monitoring of blood counts is required in patients receiving immuno-
suppressive drugs and the dose should be adjusted to prevent bone marrow 
toxicity. Immunosuppressed patients are particularly prone to atypical 
infections. 
Azathioprine is widely used in transplant recipients. It is useful when 
corticosteroid therapy alone has proven inadequate or for other conditions 
when a reduction in the dose of concurrently administered corticosteroids is 
required. It is metabolized to mercaptopurine and, as with mercaptopurine, 
doses need to be reduced when given with allopurinol. Toxic effects include 
myelosuppression and hepatic toxicity. 
Ciclosporin is a potent immunosuppressant which is virtually free of 
myelotoxic effects, but is markedly nephrotoxic. It is particularly useful for the 
prevention of graft rejection and for the prophylaxis of graft-versus-host 
disease. The dose is adjusted according to plasma ciclosporin concentrations 
and renal function. Dose-related increases in serum creatinine and blood urea 
nitrogen (BUN) during the first few weeks may necessitate dose reduction. 
Corticosteroids such as prednisolone (section 8.3) have significant 
immunosuppressant activity and can also be used to prevent rejection of organ 
transplants. 

Azathioprine 
Powder for injection: 100 mg (as sodium salt) in vial.  
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Azathioprine is a complementary list immunosuppressive medicine. 

Uses: to prevent rejection in transplant recipients; rheumatoid arthritis 
(section 2.4); inflammatory bowel disease (section 17.3). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to azathioprine and mercaptopurine; 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

220 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Precautions: monitor for toxicity throughout treatment; full blood counts 
necessary every week (or more frequently with higher doses and in renal or 
hepatic impairment) for the first 4 weeks of treatment, and at least every 
3 months thereafter; reduce dose in the elderly; pregnancy (Appendix 2); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); liver disease (Appendix 5); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

BONE MARROW SUPPRESSION. Patients should be warned to report immediately 
any signs or symptoms of bone marrow suppression, for example, unexplained bruising 
or bleeding, or infection. 
Dose:  
Transplant rejection, by mouth or by intravenous injection (over at least 1 minute 
and followed by 50 ml sodium chloride intravenous infusion) or by 
intravenous infusion, ADULT, up to 5 mg/kg on day of surgery, then reduced 
according to response to 1–4 mg/kg daily for maintenance. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

NOTE. Intravenous injection is alkaline and very irritant; the intravenous route should 
therefore only be used if oral administration is not possible. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including malaise, dizziness, 
vomiting, fever, muscular pains, arthralgia, rash, hypotension, or interstitial 
nephritis call for immediate withdrawal; haematological toxicity including 
leukopenia and thrombocytopenia (reversible upon withdrawal); liver 
impairment, cholestatic jaundice; hair loss; increased susceptibility to 
infections and colitis in patients also receiving corticosteroids; nausea; rarely 
pancreatitis, pneumonitis, and hepatic veno-occlusive disease. 

Ciclosporin 
Capsule: 25 mg. 
Concentrate for injection: 50 mg/ml in 1-ml ampoule for organ 
transplantation. 

Ciclosporin is a complementary list immunosuppressive medicine. 

Uses: prevention of rejection in kidney, liver, heart, or bone marrow 
transplantation; graft-versus-host disease; nephrotic syndrome. 

Precautions: monitor kidney function (dose-dependent increase in serum 
creatinine and urea during first few weeks post-transplant may necessitate 
dose reduction; exclude rejection in kidney transplant); monitor liver 
function (adjust dosage according to bilirubin and liver enzymes; 
Appendix 5); monitor blood pressure (discontinue if hypertension cannot 
be controlled by antihypertensives); monitor serum potassium, particularly 
if marked renal impairment (risk of hyperkalaemia); monitor serum 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 221 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

magnesium; hyperuricaemia; measure blood lipids before and during 
treatment; avoid in porphyria; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

ADDITIONAL PRECAUTIONS IN NEPHROTIC SYNDROME. Reduce dose by  
25–50% if serum creatinine more than 30% above baseline at more than one 
measurement; perform renal biopsies at yearly intervals; not recommended for patients 
who also have uncontrolled infections or malignancy. 
Dose:  
NOTE.  

Lower doses are required when ciclosporin is used with other immunosuppressants. 

Concentrate for infusion may contain polyethoxylated castor oil, which has been 
associated with anaphylaxis; observe patient for 30 minutes after starting infusion and 
then at frequent intervals. 

Organ transplantation, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 3 months,  
10–15 mg/kg 4–12 hours before surgery, then 10–15 mg/kg daily for  
1–2 weeks, reducing to 2–6 mg/kg daily for maintenance (adjust dose 
according to blood ciclosporin concentration and kidney function). 

Organ transplantation, by intravenous infusion over 2–6 hours, ADULT and CHILD, 
one third of the corresponding dose by mouth. 

Bone marrow transplantation, graft-versus-host disease, by mouth, ADULT and 
CHILD over 3 months, 12.5–15 mg/kg daily for 2 weeks, starting on the day 
before surgery, followed by 12.5 mg/kg daily for 3–6 months, then 
gradually tailed off (may take up to 1 year after transplant). 

Bone marrow transplantation, graft-versus-host disease, by intravenous infusion 
over 2–6 hours, ADULT and CHILD over 3 months, 3–5 mg/kg daily for 
2 weeks, starting on the day before surgery, followed by maintenance by 
mouth. 

Nephrotic syndrome, by mouth, ADULT, initially 5 mg/kg daily in 2 divided 
doses; CHILD, initially 6 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses; (reduce dose in 
renal impairment; maximum, 2.5 mg/kg daily); slowly reduced to lowest 
effective dose according to proteinuria and serum creatinine measurements 
for maintenance; discontinue after 3 months if no improvement (after 
6 months in membranous glomerulonephritis). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

CONVERSION. Any conversion between brands should be undertaken very carefully, 
and the manufacturer consulted for further information. 

Adverse effects: dose-related and reversible increases in serum creatinine and 
urea unrelated to tissue rejection; burning sensation in hands and feet 
during initial therapy; electrolyte disturbances including hyperkalaemia, and 
hypomagnesaemia; hepatic dysfunction; hyperuricaemia; 
hypercholesterolaemia; hyperglycaemia, hypertension (especially in heart 

222 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

transplant patients); increased incidence of malignancies and 
lymphoproliferative disorders; increased susceptibility to infections due to 
immunosuppression; gastrointestinal disturbances; gingival hyperplasia; 
hirsutism; fatigue; allergic reactions; thrombocytopenia (sometimes with 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome); also mild anaemia, tremors, convulsions, 
neuropathy; dysmenorrhoea or amenorrhoea; pancreatitis, myopathy or 
muscle weakness; cramp; gout; oedema; headache. 

8.2 Cytotoxic medicines 

NOTE. WHO advises that adequate resources and specialist supervision are a 
prerequisite for the introduction of this class of drugs. Specific expertise, 
diagnostic precision, individualization of dosage and special equipment are 
required for their proper use. 
The treatment of cancer with drugs, radiotherapy, and surgery is complex and 
should only be undertaken by an oncologist. For this reason, the following 
information is provided merely as a guide.  
Chemotherapy may be curative or used to alleviate symptoms or to prolong 
life. Where the condition can no longer be managed with cytotoxic therapy, 
alternative palliative treatment (section 8.4) should be considered. 
For some tumours, single-drug chemotherapy may be adequate, but for most 
malignancies a combination of drugs provides the best response; specialist 
literature should be consulted.  Cytotoxic drugs are often combined with other 
classes of drugs in the treatment of malignant conditions. Such drugs include 
hormone agonists and antagonists, corticosteroids, and immunostimulant 
drugs (section 8.3). Combinations are, however, more toxic than single drugs.  
The following information provides basic background information on drugs 
that have specific anti-tumour activity. These are toxic drugs which should be 
used with great care and close monitoring. The specific doses and details of 
contraindications, precautions, and adverse effects for the individual cytotoxic 
drugs have been omitted since treatment should be undertaken by specialists 
using approved regimens; specialist literature should be consulted for further 
information. 

Precautions and contraindications 

Treatment with cytotoxic drugs should be initiated only after baseline tests of 
liver and kidney function have been performed and baseline blood counts 
established. It may be necessary to modify or delay treatment in certain 
circumstances. The patient should also be monitored regularly during 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 223 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

chemotherapy and cytotoxic drugs withheld if there is significant deterioration 
in bone marrow, liver or kidney function. 
Most cytotoxic drugs are teratogenic and should not be administered during 
pregnancy, especially in the first trimester. Contraceptive measures are required 
during therapy and possibly for a period after therapy has ended. Cytotoxic 
drugs are also contraindicated during breastfeeding. The risk of venous 
thromboembolism in cancer is increased by chemotherapy; prophylaxis against 
thromboembolism may be appropriate for patients receiving chemotherapy. 
Cytotoxic drugs should be administered with care to avoid undue toxicity to 
the patient or exposure during handling by the health-care provider. Local 
policies for the handling and reconstitution of cytotoxic drugs should be 
strictly adhered to; also all waste, including patient’s body fluids and excreta 
(and any material contaminated by them) should be treated as hazardous.  
Extravasation of intravenously administered cytotoxic drugs can result in 
severe pain and necrosis of the surrounding tissue. If extravasation occurs, 
aspiration of the drug should first be attempted, then the affected limb is 
elevated and warm compresses applied to speed and dilute the infusion or it is 
localized by applying cold compresses until the inflammation subsides; in 
severe cases, hydrocortisone cream may be applied topically to the site of 
inflammation (section 13.3). The manufacturer’s literature should also be 
consulted for more specific information.  

Adverse effects 

Cytotoxic drugs have a considerable potential to damage normal tissue. 
Specific adverse effects apply, but a number are common to all cytotoxics such 
as bone marrow and immunological suppression. Furthermore, the 
concomitant use of immunosuppressive drugs will enhance susceptibility to 
infections. Fever associated with neutropenia or immunosuppression requires 
immediate treatment with antibiotics.  
Nausea and vomiting. Nausea and vomiting following administration of cytotoxic 
drugs and abdominal radiotherapy are often distressing and may compromise 
further treatment. Symptoms may be acute (occurring within 24 hours of 
treatment), delayed (first occurring more than 24 hours after treatment), or 
anticipatory (occurring before subsequent doses). Delayed and anticipatory 
symptoms are more difficult to control than acute symptoms and require 
different management. 
Susceptibility to drug-induced nausea and vomiting varies among patients; 
those more affected include women, patients under 50 years, anxious patients, 
and those who suffer from motion sickness. Repeated exposure to the 
cytotoxic therapy also increases susceptibility.  

224 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Cytotoxic drugs associated with a low risk of emesis include etoposide, 
fluorouracil, low-dose methotrexate, and the vinca alkaloids; those with an 
intermediate risk include lower doses of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 
high-dose methotrexate; cisplatin, high-dose cyclophosphamide, and 
dacarbazine tend to have the highest risk of emesis. 
For patients at a low risk of emesis, pretreatment with an oral phenothiazine 
(for example, chlorpromazine, section 24.1), continued for up to 24 hours after 
chemotherapy, is often helpful. For patients at a higher risk, dexamethasone,  
6–10 mg by mouth (section 18.1) may be added before chemotherapy. For 
patients at a high risk of emesis or when other therapies are ineffective, high 
doses of intravenous metoclopramide (section 17.2) may be used. 
Dexamethasone is the drug of choice for the prevention of delayed symptoms; 
it is used alone or in combination with metoclopramide (see also section 17.2). 
Good symptom control is the best way to prevent anticipatory symptoms and 
the addition of diazepam (sections 1.3 and 24.3) to antiemetic therapy is 
helpful because of its sedative, anxiolytic, and amnesic effects. 
Hyperuricaemia. Hyperuricaemia may complicate treatment of conditions such 
as non-Hodgkin lymphomas and leukaemia. Renal damage may result from the 
formation of uric acid crystals. Patients should be adequately hydrated and 
hyperuricaemia may be managed with allopurinol (section 2.3), initiated 
24 hours before cytotoxic treatment and continued for 7–10 days afterwards. 
Alopecia. Alopecia is common during treatment with cytotoxic drugs. There is 
no drug treatment, but the condition often reverses spontaneously once 
treatment has stopped. 
Oral mucositis. Oral mucositis is common during cancer chemotherapy, 
particularly with fluorouracil, methotrexate, and the anthracyclines. Prevention 
of a sore mouth is important, because once it has developed treatment is much 
less effective. Brushing teeth with a soft brush 2–3 times daily and rinsing the 
mouth frequently are probably the most effective preventative measures. 
Sucking ice-chips during short infusions of fluorouracil is also helpful. 
Treatment involves regular use of saline mouthwashes. Generally mucositis is 
self-limiting, but it can be a focus for blood-borne infection in the absence of 
good oral hygiene. Any pain caused by mucositis should be dealt with 
effectively. 

Alkylating medicines  
Alkylating medicines are among the most widely used drugs in cancer 
chemotherapy. They act by damaging DNA and therefore interfering with cell 
replication. However, there are 2 complications. Firstly, they affect 
gametogenesis and may cause permanent male sterility; in women, the 
reproductive span may be shortened by the onset of a premature menopause. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 225 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Secondly, they are associated with a marked increase in the incidence of acute 
non-lymphocytic leukaemia, in particular when combined with extensive 
radiation therapy.  
Cyclophosphamide requires hepatic activation; it can therefore be given orally 
and is not vesicant when given intravenously. Like all alkylating drugs its major 
toxic effects are myelosuppression, alopecia, nausea and vomiting. It can also 
cause haemorrhagic cystitis; an increased fluid intake for 24–48 hours will help 
to avoid this complication. Cyclophosphamide is used either as part of 
treatment or as an adjuvant in non-Hodgkin lymphomas, breast cancer, 
childhood leukaemia, and ovarian cancer. It is also used in several palliative 
regimens.  
Chlorambucil is used to treat chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma, Hodgkin disease, and Waldenstrom (primary) macroglobulinaemia. 
Adverse effects, apart from bone marrow suppression, are uncommon. 
However, severe widespread rash can develop and may progress to Stevens-
Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis. If a rash occurs, further 
treatment with chlorambucil is contraindicated.  

Cytotoxic antibiotics 
Bleomycin is used in regimens for the treatment of Hodgkin disease and 
testicular cancer. It has several antineoplastic drug toxicities; it is known to 
cause dose-related pneumonitis and fibrosis which can be fatal, and is 
associated with rare acute hypersensitivity reactions. Cutaneous toxicity has 
also been reported.  
Doxorubicin is a widely used anthracycline antibiotic used to treat acute 
leukaemias, lymphomas, and a variety of solid tumours. Doxorubicin also plays 
a palliative role in the treatment of other malignancies. The primary toxic 
effects are myelosuppression, alopecia, nausea, and vomiting, and dose-related 
cardiomyopathy. It is also vesicant and can cause severe skin ulceration on 
extravasation. Liposomal formulations of doxorubicin [not included on the 
15th WHO Model List] are now available. They may reduce the incidence of 
cardiotoxicity and local necrosis, but severe infusion reactions and hand–foot 
syndrome may occur.  
Dactinomycin is used to treat paediatric cancers. Its toxicity is similar to that of 
doxorubicin, but it is not cardiotoxic.  
Daunorubicin is used in acute leukaemias. Its toxicity is similar to that of 
doxorubicin.  

Antimetabolites and related therapy  
Cytarabine is used in the treatment of acute leukaemia; children may tolerate 
high doses better than adults. Its effects are highly dependent upon the 

226 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

schedule of administration. It causes myelosuppression, mucositis, and in high 
doses, central neurotoxicity.  
Fluorouracil is primarily used in the adjuvant treatment of colorectal and breast 
cancer. It is also employed in the palliative treatment of other malignancies. It 
causes myelosuppression and palmar–plantar syndrome (erythema and painful 
desquamation of the hands and feet). When its action is modified by other 
drugs (such as calcium folinate), its toxicity profile can change; mucositis and 
diarrhoea may be significant problems. Central neurotoxicity can also occur.  
Mercaptopurine is frequently used in the therapy of childhood leukaemia. It is 
administered orally and toxic effects include myelosuppression, nausea, 
hepatotoxicity and rarely pancreatitis.  
Methotrexate is used to treat a variety of malignancies and it plays a major role 
as an adjuvant for the treatment of breast cancer. Like fluorouracil, 
methotrexate is myelotoxic, but nausea and vomiting are minimal. It also 
causes mucositis. Renal impairment reduces methotrexate excretion and can 
exacerbate toxicity.  
Calcium folinate is used to counteract the folate-antagonist action of 
methotrexate and thus speed recovery from methotrexate-induced mucositis 
or myelosuppression. Calcium folinate also enhances the therapeutic effects of 
fluorouracil when the 2 are used together in metastatic colorectal cancer.  

Vinca alkaloids and etoposide 
The vinca alkaloids, vinblastine and vincristine, are primarily used in the 
treatment of acute leukaemias. Vinblastine is also used for Hodgkin disease 
and some solid tumours. Vincristine is also used in the management of non-
Hodgkin lymphomas. Both can cause neurotoxicity, but this is more of a 
problem with vincristine. Myelosuppression is more common with vinblastine. 
Vinblastine and vincristine are for intravenous injection only. Inadvertent 
intrathecal administration causes severe neurotoxicity which is usually fatal.  
Etoposide is an important component of the treatment of testicular carcinoma, 
and is also used in several regimens for lung cancers and lymphomas. It causes 
myelosuppression and alopecia and it can cause hypotension during infusion. 
It does not produce significant nausea and vomiting. 

Other antineoplastic medicines  
The enzyme, asparaginase, is an important component in the management of 
childhood leukaemia, but is not used in any other malignancy. Its toxicity 
profile is broad and the drug must be carefully administered because of the risk 
of anaphylaxis.  
Cisplatin is a platinum compound which is used alone or in combination with 
other cytotoxic drugs for the treatment of testicular, lung, cervical, bladder, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 227 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

head and neck, and ovarian cancer. Cisplatin is myelosuppressive and also 
produces slight alopecia; it also causes severe dose-related nausea and vomiting, 
and is nephrotoxic and neurotoxic. Nephrotoxicity can be reduced by 
maintaining high urine output during cisplatin administration and immediately 
afterwards, but neurotoxicity is often dose-limiting.  
Dacarbazine, thought to act as an alkylating drug, is a component of a regimen 
for Hodgkin disease. It is also used in the palliative therapy of metastatic 
malignant melanoma. Its major toxic effects are myelosuppression, and severe 
nausea and vomiting.  
Procarbazine is used in the treatment of advanced Hodgkin disease. Toxic 
effects include myelosuppression, nausea, and vomiting, central nervous 
system symptoms, and depression. Procarbazine possesses a weak monoamine 
oxidase inhibitory effect but dietary restriction is not usually necessary. 

Asparaginase 
Powder for injection: 10 000 IU in vial. 

Also known as Crisantaspase. 

Asparaginase is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. 
Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Bleomycin 
Powder for injection: 15 mg (as sulfate) in vial. 

Bleomycin is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: adjunct to surgery and radiotherapy in palliative treatment of Hodgkin 
and non-Hodgkin lymphomas; reticulum cell sarcoma and lymphoma; 
carcinomas of the head, neck, larynx, cervix, penis, skin, vulva, testicles; 
embryonal cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, and teratoma; malignant 
effusions. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

228 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
NOTE. Doses of bleomycin are expressed in international units. 1 Bleomycin Unit in 
the USP is equivalent to 1000 international units. 

Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Calcium folinate 
Injection: 3 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 15 mg. 

Calcium folinate is a complementary list medicine. 

Uses: antidote in high-dose methotrexate therapy (as a ‘folate rescue’); 
inadvertent overdose of methotrexate; palliative treatment of advanced 
metastatic colorectal cancer (in combination with fluorouracil). 

Precautions: not for pernicious anaemia or other megaloblastic anaemias due 
to vitamin B12 deficiency; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Antidote to methotrexate (usually started 24 hours after administration of 
methotrexate), by intramuscular or intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion, 
ADULT and CHILD, up to 120 mg in divided doses over 12–24 hours, then 
12–15 mg by intramuscular injection, or 15 mg by mouth every 6 hours for 48–
72 hours. 

Methotrexate overdosage (started as soon as possible, preferably within 1 hour 
of administration of methotrexate), by intravenous injection or infusion, ADULT 
and CHILD, dose equal to or higher than that of methotrexate, at rate not 
exceeding 160 mg/minute. 

Colorectal cancer (in combination with fluorouracil), consult specialist 
literature. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

NOTE. Intrathecal injection of calcium folinate is contraindicated. 

Adverse effects: allergic reactions; pyrexia after parenteral administration. 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 229 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Chlorambucil 
Tablet: 2 mg. 

Chlorambucil is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; some non-Hodgkin lymphomas; 
Hodgkin disease, and Waldenstrom (primary) macroglobulinaemia. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); severe hepatic impairment (Appendix 5);  interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Cisplatin 
Powder for injection: 10 mg; 50 mg in vial. 

Cisplatin is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: metastatic testicular tumours, metastatic ovarian tumours, advanced 
bladder carcinoma and other solid tumours, including lung, cervical, and 
head and neck cancers. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Cyclophosphamide 
Powder for injection: 500 mg in vial. 
Tablet: 25 mg. 

Cyclophosphamide is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: malignant lymphomas including non-Hodgkin lymphomas, lymphocytic 
lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma; multiple myeloma; leukaemias, mycosis 
fungoides; neuroblastoma; adenocarcinoma of the ovary; retinoblastoma; 
breast cancer. 

230 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4) and hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Cytarabine 
Powder for injection: 100 mg in vial. 

Cytarabine is a complementary cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; chronic myeloid leukaemia; meningeal 
leukaemia; erythroleukaemia; non-Hodgkin lymphomas. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Dacarbazine 
Powder for injection: 100 mg in vial. 

Dacarbazine is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: metastatic malignant melanoma; Hodgkin disease. 
Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 231 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Dactinomycin 
Powder for injection: 500 micrograms in vial. 

Also known as Actinomycin D. 

Dactinomycin is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: trophoblastic tumours, Wilm tumour, Ewing sarcoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Daunorubicin 
Powder for injection: 50 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Daunorubicin is a complementary cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: acute leukaemias. 
Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Doxorubicin 
Powder for injection: 10 mg; 50 mg (hydrochloride) in vial. 

Doxorubicin hydrochloride is a complementary cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: acute leukaemias; carcinomas of the breast, bladder, ovary and thyroid; 
neuroblastoma; Wilm tumour; non-Hodgkin and Hodgkin lymphomas; soft 
tissue sarcomas, osteosarcoma. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

232 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Etoposide 
Capsule: 100 mg. 
Injection: 20 mg/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 

Etoposide is a complementary cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: refractory testicular tumours; lung cancer. 
Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; severe 
hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Fluorouracil 
Injection: 50 mg/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 

Also known as 5-fluorouracil or 5FU.  

Fluorouracil is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: carcinomas of the colorectum, breast, stomach, pancreas, cervix, 
prostate, ovary; and endometrium; liver tumours; head and neck tumours; 
actinic keratosis (section 13.5). 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 233 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Mercaptopurine 
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Mercaptopurine is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: acute leukaemias; inflammatory bowel disease (section 17.3). 
Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (monitor liver function; see also 
Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Methotrexate 
Tablet: 2.5 mg (as sodium salt). 
Powder for injection: 50 mg (as sodium salt) in vial. 

Methotrexate is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: carcinoma of the breast, head and neck, and lung; trophoblastic tumours; 
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, meningeal leukaemia; non-Hodgkin 
lymphomas; advanced cases of mycosis fungoides; non-metastatic 
osteosarcoma; severe rheumatoid arthritis (section 2.4); Crohn disease 
(section 17.3). 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Procarbazine 
Capsule: 50 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Procarbazine is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: part of MOPP regimen in Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas. 

234 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; severe renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); severe hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Vinblastine 
Powder for injection: 10 mg (sulfate) in vial. 

Vinblastine is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: disseminated Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas; advanced 
testicular carcinoma, breast carcinoma; palliative treatment of Kaposi 
sarcoma; trophoblastic tumours; Letterer-Siwe disease. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); intrathecal injection. 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 
Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
NOTE. Vinblastine is for intravenous administration only. Intrathecal injection 
causes severe neurotoxicity which is usually fatal. 

Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

Vincristine 
Powder for injection: 1 mg; 5 mg (sulfate) in vial. 

Vincristine is a complementary list cytotoxic medicine. 

Uses: acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; neuroblastoma, Wilm tumour, Hodgkin 
and non-Hodgkin lymphomas; rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma; 
mycosis fungoides. 

Contraindications: see note above and consult specialist literature; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); intrathecal injection. 

Precautions: see note above and consult specialist literature; hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE. Irritant to tissues. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 235 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Dose:  

Consult specialist literature. 
NOTE. Vincristine is for intravenous administration only. Intrathecal injection 
causes severe neurotoxicity which is usually fatal. 

Adverse effects: see note above and consult specialist literature. 

8.3 Hormones and antihormones 

The corticosteroids prednisolone, dexamethasone and hydrocortisone are 
synthetic hormones which may be given at pharmacological doses for certain 
malignancies, particularly haematological malignancies. Although there is no 
evidence for therapeutic superiority, prednisolone is used more commonly 
than dexamethasone or hydrocortisone (section 3); prednisolone is an 
important component of curative regimens for lymphomas and childhood 
leukaemias and for other cancers it has a palliative role. However, chronic use 
leads to the development of a cushingoid syndrome. For further information 
on the long-term use of corticosteroids, including the disadvantages, see 
section 18.1. 
Tamoxifen is an estrogen-receptor antagonist. It is the adjuvant hormonal 
treatment of choice for all women with estrogen-receptor-positive breast 
cancer and for palliative management in patients with advanced disease. When 
given at the recommended doses, it has few adverse effects, although it can 
induce uterine endometrial malignancies. 

Dexamethasone 
Injection: 4 mg dexamethasone phosphate (as disodium salt) in 1-ml 
ampoule.  

Dexamethasone is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of malignant 
neoplasms (section 3.3). 

Hydrocortisone 
Powder for injection: 100 mg (as sodium succinate) in vial. 

Hydrocortisone is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of malignant 
neoplasms (section 3.3). 

 

 

236 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Prednisolone 
Tablet: 5 mg; 25 mg. 

Prednisolone is a representative corticosteroid with mainly glucocorticoid activity. 
Various drugs can serve as alternatives. 

Prednisolone is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of malignant 
neoplasms. 

Uses: with antineoplastic drugs for acute lymphoblastic and chronic 
lymphocytic leukaemias, Hodgkin disease, and non-Hodgkin lymphomas; 
inflammatory and allergic reactions (sections 3 and 18.1); inflammation of 
the eye (section 21.2). 

Contraindications: untreated bacterial, viral, and fungal infections; avoid live 
virus vaccines. 

Precautions: monitor body weight, blood pressure, fluid and electrolyte 
balance, and blood glucose concentration throughout treatment; adrenal 
suppression during and for some months after withdrawal (intercurrent 
infection or surgery may require increased dose of corticosteroid or 
temporary reintroduction if already withdrawn); quiescent amoebiasis, 
strongyloidiasis, or tuberculosis possibly reactivated; increased severity of 
viral infections, particularly chickenpox and measles (passive immunization 
with immunoglobulin required); hypertension, recent myocardial infarction, 
congestive heart failure; elderly; children and adolescents (growth 
retardation possibly reversible); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); diabetes mellitus; osteoporosis; glaucoma, 
corneal perforation; severe psychosis, epilepsy; psoriasis; peptic ulcer; 
hypothyroidism; history of steroid myopathy; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Leukaemias and lymphomas, by mouth, ADULT, initially up to 100 mg daily, then 
gradually reduced if possible to 20–40 mg daily; CHILD up to 1 year, initially 
up to 25 mg, then gradually reduced to 5–10 mg daily; CHILD 2–7 years, 
initially up to 50 mg daily, then gradually reduced to 10–20 mg daily; CHILD 
8–12 years, initially up to 75 mg, then gradually reduced to 15–30 mg daily. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal effects including dyspepsia, oesophageal 
ulceration, development of or aggravation of peptic ulcers, abdominal 
distension, acute pancreatitis; increased appetite and weight gain; adrenal 
suppression with high doses, leading to cushingoid symptoms (moon face, 
acne, bruising, abdominal striae, truncal obesity, muscle wasting); menstrual 
irregularities and amenorrhoea; hypertension; osteoporosis, with resultant 
vertebral collapse and long-bone fractures; avascular osteonecrosis; 
ophthalmic effects including glaucoma, subcapsular cataracts, exacerbation 
of viral or fungal eye infections; diabetes mellitus; thromboembolism; 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 237 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

delayed tissue healing; myopathy, muscle weakness of arms and legs; 
depression, psychosis, epilepsy; raised intracranial pressure; hypersensitivity 
reactions. 

Tamoxifen 
Tablet: 10 mg; 20 mg (as citrate). 

Tamoxifen is a complementary medicine for the treatment of breast cancer. 

Uses: adjuvant treatment of estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer; 
metastatic breast cancer. 

Contraindications: pregnancy (exclude before treatment and advise non-
hormonal contraception if appropriate, see also Appendix 2). 

Precautions: monitor for endometrial changes (increased incidence of 
hyperplasia, polyps, cancer, and uterine sarcoma); cystic ovarian swellings in 
premenopausal women; increased risk of thromboembolism when used 
with antineoplastic drugs; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid in porphyria; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Breast cancer, by mouth, ADULT, 20 mg daily. 
Adverse effects: hot flushes; endometrial changes (symptoms such as vaginal 
bleeding and other menstrual irregularities, vaginal discharge, pelvic pain 
require immediate investigation); increased pain and hypercalcaemia with 
bony metastases; tumour flare; nausea and vomiting; liver enzyme changes 
(rarely cholestasis, hepatitis, hepatic necrosis); hypertriglyceridaemia 
(sometimes with pancreatitis); thromboembolic events; decreased platelet 
count; oedema; alopecia; rash; headache; visual disturbances including 
corneal changes, cataracts, retinopathy; rarely interstitial pneumonitis, and 
hypersensitivity reactions including angioedema, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
and bullous pemphigoid. 

8.4 Medicines used in palliative care 

NOTE. The WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential 
Medicines recommends that all the drugs mentioned in Cancer pain relief: with a 
guide to opioid availability, 2nd ed. Geneva: WHO 1996 be considered essential. 
These drugs are included in the relevant sections of the Model List according 
to their therapeutic use, for example, analgesics. 
Palliative care includes both pain relief and the symptomatic relief of 
conditions including dyspnoea, restlessness and confusion, anorexia, 

238 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

constipation, pruritus, nausea and vomiting, and insomnia. Health 
organizations should be encouraged to develop their own palliative care 
services.  
Pain relief can be achieved with drugs and neurosurgical, psychological, and 
behavioural approaches adapted to individual patient needs. If carried out 
correctly, most patients with cancer pain can obtain effective relief. Pain is best 
treated with a combination of drug and non-drug measures. Some types of 
pain respond well to a combination of a non-opioid and an opioid analgesic. 
Other types of pain are relieved by combining a corticosteroid and an opioid. 
Neuropathic pain often shows little response to non-opioids and opioids, but 
may be eased by tricyclic antidepressants and anticonvulsants (see below). 
Cancer patients often have many fears and anxieties, and may become 
depressed. Very anxious or deeply depressed patients may need an appropriate 
psychotropic drug in addition to an analgesic. If this fact is not appreciated, the 
pain may remain intractable.  

Pain management with analgesics  

In the majority of patients, cancer pain can be relieved with analgesics:  

- By mouth: if possible analgesics should be given by mouth. Rectal 
suppositories are useful in patients with dysphagia, uncontrolled vomiting 
or gastrointestinal obstruction. Continuous subcutaneous infusion offers an 
alternative route.  

- By the clock: analgesics are more effective in preventing pain than relieving 
established pain, and therefore doses should be given at fixed time intervals 
and titrated against the patient’s pain; if pain occurs between doses, a rescue 
dose should be given, and the next dose increased.  

- By the ladder: the first step is to give a non-opioid analgesic such as 
acetylsalicylic acid, paracetamol or ibuprofen, if necessary with an adjuvant 
drug. If this does not relieve the pain, an opioid for mild to moderate pain, 
such as codeine, should be added. When this combination fails to relieve 
pain, an opioid for moderate to severe pain, such as morphine, should be 
substituted (section 2.2).  

- For the individual: there are no standard doses for opioid drugs. The range 
for oral morphine is from as little as 5 mg to more than 100 mg every 
4 hours. Sustained-release morphine tablets are available to enable oral 
dosing every 12 hours (section 2.2).  

- With attention to detail: the first and last doses of the day should be linked 
to the patient’s waking time and bedtime. Ideally the drug regimen should 
be written out in full for the patient and his or her family. The patient 
should be warned about possible adverse effects.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 239 



8. Antineoplastic, immunosuppressives and medicines used in palliative care 

Medicines for neuropathic pain  

Neuropathic pain often responds to a tricyclic antidepressant, such as 
amitriptyline (section 24.2), or to an anticonvulsant such as carbamazepine or 
valproic acid (both section 5); ketamine (section 1.1) or lidocaine (section 1.2) 
by intravenous infusion may be useful in some situations. Neuropathic pain 
may respond only partially to opioids, but they may be considered when other 
options fail. A corticosteroid may be required, particularly to relieve pain in 
patients with nerve compression.  
 

240 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



9. Antiparkinsonism medicines 

 

 

SECTION 9:  
Antiparkinsonism medicines 

 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 241 



9. Antiparkinsonism medicines 

Parkinsonism 
The use of pharmacotherapy in parkinsonism will depend upon the degree of 
incapacity of the patient and is generally not justified until symptoms 
compromise working ability and social relationships; levodopa is, however, 
used in the early stages in some patients. Close supervision is then needed to 
ensure that treatment regimens are tolerated and that appropriate changes are 
made to the regimen as the disease progresses. 
The most effective form of therapy is a combination of levodopa and a 
peripheral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor, such as carbidopa. The response to 
levodopa with carbidopa is a compromise between increased mobility and 
adverse effects. Dyskinesias may be dose limiting and increasingly frequent 
with increased duration of treatment. Many factors, including tolerance and 
progression of the disease, may result in complications after 2–5 years of 
treatment. “End-of-dose” deterioration occurs when there is a reduced 
duration of benefit from a dose, resulting in disability and dystonias. The “on–
off” phenomenon is characterized by large variations in motor performance, 
with normal function during the “on” period, and weakness and restricted 
mobility during the “off” period. Amelioration of these effects can sometimes 
be achieved by administering levodopa in a sustained-release preparation or in 
a greater number of fractionated doses throughout the day. Psychiatric 
symptoms including disruption of sleep, vivid dreams and hallucinations are 
characteristic adverse effects that may occur at any time, especially in the 
elderly, and may require dose reduction or withdrawal of levodopa. 
Treatment for idiopathic parkinsonism is often initiated with a dopamine 
receptor agonist such as bromocriptine [not on the 15th WHO Model List]. 
Supplementary use of amantadine [not on the 15th WHO Model List], 
bromocriptine or the monoamine-oxidase-B inhibitor, selegiline [not on the 
15th WHO Model List] can be of value either to enhance the effect of 
levodopa or to reduce “end-of-dose” fluctuations and “on–off” effects.  
Anticholinergic (more correctly termed antimuscarinic) drugs such as 
biperiden are usually sufficient in drug-induced parkinsonism. 

Essential tremor and related disorders 

ESSENTIAL TREMOR. It can be treated with beta-blockers such as 
propranolol (120 mg daily) (section 7.2) which may be of value if the tremor 
results in physical or social disability. 

DYSTONIAS. If no identifiable cause is found and the patient does not go 
into spontaneous remission, a trial of levodopa should be given to determine 
whether the patient has dopamine-responsive dystonia. If there is no response 
within three months, the drug should be withdrawn and small doses of an 
anticholinergic drug such as biperiden should be given. The dosage may be 

242 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



9. Antiparkinsonism medicines 

increased gradually and up to 16 mg daily may be tolerated. In patients who fail 
to respond to either levodopa or an anticholinergic, other drugs including 
diazepam, baclofen, carbamazepine or phenothiazines may be of value. 
Psychological treatments have also been used successfully in the management 
of dyskinesias. 

CHOREA. Choreiform movements can be induced by certain drugs including 
levodopa, phenytoin and antipsychotic drugs. Huntington disease is the most 
common of the hereditary choreas. Drug treatment is symptomatic and does 
not alter the progression of the disease. The aim of therapy is to reduce 
dopaminergic transmission which results from excessive or enhanced 
cholinergic activity. 

Antipsychotic drugs antagonize dopamine and usually lessen the chorea 
temporarily. 

Tetrabenazine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], the dopamine-
depleting drug, is used to control movement disorders in Huntington chorea 
and related disorders. 

TICS. Tics which resemble choreiform movements are commonly associated 
with anxiety. However, in the more complex multiple tic disorder, Tourette 
syndrome, treatment with antipsychotic drugs may be required. 

TARDIVE DYSKINESIA. It is associated with chronic administration of 
antipsychotic drugs. It is characterized by involuntary, repetitive, choreiform 
movement of the cheek, mouth and fingers. The first step of treatment should 
always be discontinuation of the antipsychotic drug or dosage reduction if the 
underlying psychotic disorder permits. 

Biperiden 
Injection: 5 mg (lactate) in 1-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 2 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms (but not tardive dyskinesias) and 
adjunctive treatment of parkinsonism. 

Contraindications: angle-closure glaucoma; untreated urinary retention; 
prostatic hypertrophy; myasthenia gravis; gastrointestinal obstruction. 

Precautions: the elderly; cardiovascular disease, hepatic impairment  
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); avoid abrupt withdrawal; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding  (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 243 



9. Antiparkinsonism medicines 

Dose:  
Drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms, parkinsonism, by mouth, ADULT, 
initially 1 mg twice daily, increased gradually to 2 mg 3 times daily; usual 
maintenance dose, 3–12 mg daily in divided doses. 

Drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms, parkinsonism, by intramuscular injection 
or slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 2.5–5 mg repeated as necessary; maximum, 
20 mg in 24 hours. 

Adverse effects: drowsiness, dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision; hesitancy 
of micturition, dizziness, tachycardia, arrhythmias; confusion, excitement, 
agitation, hallucinations, and psychiatric disturbances with high dosage, 
especially in the elderly and other susceptible patients (may require 
withdrawal of treatment); impaired memory. 

Levodopa + carbidopa 
Tablet: 100 mg + 10 mg; 250 mg + 25 mg. 

Carbidopa is a representative peripheral dopa­decarboxylase inhibitor. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: all forms of parkinsonism other than drug-induced. 
Contraindications: concurrent use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors; angle-
closure glaucoma; confirmed or suspected malignant melanoma. 

Precautions: pulmonary disease, peptic ulceration, cardiovascular disease 
(including previous myocardial infarction); diabetes mellitus, osteomalacia, 
open-angle glaucoma, history of melanoma (risk of activation), psychiatric 
illness (avoid if severe); close monitoring of hepatic, haematological, 
psychiatric, cardiovascular, and renal function required in long-term therapy; 
the elderly; avoid rapid dose increases; warn patients to resume normal 
activities gradually; avoid abrupt withdrawal; pregnancy (toxicity in animals) 
(Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose: Parkinsonism, by mouth, ADULT, expressed in terms of levodopa, initially 
100 mg (with carbidopa 10 mg) twice daily, increased by 100 mg (with 
carbidopa 10 mg) every few days as necessary, to a maximum of levodopa 
1.5 g. 

ADMINISTRATION. Optimum daily dose must be determined for each patient by 
careful monitoring and be taken after meals. 

NOTE. Carbidopa, 70–100 mg daily, is necessary for full inhibition of peripheral dopa-
decarboxylase. 

244 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



9. Antiparkinsonism medicines 

Adverse effects: nausea, anorexia, and vomiting, particularly at the start of 
treatment; postural hypotension at the start of treatment, particularly in the 
elderly and those receiving antihypertensives; excessive drowsiness and 
sudden onset of sleep (warn patient of these effects); confusion, vivid 
dreams, dizziness, tachycardia, arrhythmias; reddish discoloration of body 
fluids; insomnia, headache, flushing, gastrointestinal bleeding, peripheral 
neuropathy; taste disturbances, pruritus, rash, liver enzyme changes; 
psychiatric symptoms including psychosis, depression, and hallucinations; 
delusions and neurological disturbances including dyskinesias (may be dose-
limiting); painful dystonic spasms (“end-of-dose” effects) and (“on-off” 
effects) after prolonged treatment (see note above); neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome (on sudden withdrawal); rarely hypersensitivity. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 245 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

 

 

 

SECTION 10:   
Medicines affecting the blood 

10.1 Antianaemia medicines 247 

10.2 Medicines affecting coagulation 251 

246 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

10.1 Antianaemia medicines 

Iron-deficiency anaemia 
Anaemia occurs when the blood haemoglobin concentration falls below the 
normal range for the age and sex of the individual. It has many different 
aetiologies and thus it is essential that a correct diagnosis is made before 
initiating therapy. Any serious underlying cause of iron-deficiency anaemia, 
including gastric erosion and gastrointestinal cancer, should be excluded before 
giving iron replacement. 
Prophylaxis with iron salts is justifiable in individuals who have additional risk 
factors for iron deficiency (for example, dietary deficiency). Prophylaxis may 
also be appropriate in malabsorption, menorrhagia, after subtotal or total 
gastrectomy, and in haemodialysis patients. 
Supplementation with iron and folic acid is recommended by WHO for all 
pregnant women; in addition, where prevalence of anaemia is above 40%, it is 
recommended that women of child-bearing age and breastfeeding women 
should be given 3 months of iron and folic acid supplementation. 
Low birth-weight infants, including preterm neonates, should receive iron 
supplementation between the ages of 2 and 23 months. Iron supplementation 
should also be given to all children aged between 6 and 23 months if their diet 
does not include foods fortified with iron or if prevalence of anaemia is above 
40%. Children aged 24 months and above should receive a 3-month course of 
iron supplementation (with folic acid if above 5 years) if the local prevalence of 
anaemia is above 40%. 
Iron should be given orally wherever possible. Ferrous salts are preferred as 
non ferric salts are much less well absorbed.  Preparations containing ferrous 
salts differ only marginally in efficiency of absorption and thus the choice of 
preparation is usually decided by the incidence of adverse effects and cost. The 
oral dose of elemental iron for treatment of iron-deficiency anaemia in adults 
should be in the range, 100–200 mg daily, taken with meals. 
The approximate elemental iron content of various ferrous salts is: 

- ferrous fumarate 210 mg (68 mg iron); 

- ferrous gluconate 300 mg (35 mg iron);  

- ferrous succinate 100 mg (35 mg iron);  

- ferrous sulfate 300 mg (60 mg iron);  

- dried ferrous sulfate 200 mg (65 mg iron). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 247 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

The haemoglobin concentration should rise by about 100–200 mg/100 ml per 
day or by 2 g/100 ml over 3–4 weeks. After the haemoglobin has risen to 
normal, treatment should be continued for a further 3 months to replenish the 
body’s iron stores. 
Iron intake in the evening has been reported to improve its absorption. Iron 
intake with meals may reduce bioavailability but may improve tolerability and 
adherence. 
If adverse effects occur, either the dosage can be reduced or an alternative 
ferrous salt used, but an improvement in tolerance may be due to lower intake 
of elemental iron. Gastrointestinal irritation may occur with iron salts. Nausea 
and epigastric pain are dose-related. Iron preparations taken orally may be 
constipating, particularly in the elderly, occasionally leading to faecal impaction. 
Oral iron may exacerbate diarrhoea in patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease but care is also needed in patients with intestinal strictures and 
diverticular disease. Iron as iron dextran (a complex of ferric hydroxide with 
dextrans) [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] or iron sucrose (a 
complex of ferric hydroxide with sucrose) [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List] may be given parenterally if the patient cannot tolerate oral iron, 
or does not take it reliably or if there is continuing severe blood loss or 
malabsorption. Many patients with chronic renal failure who are receiving 
haemodialysis (and some on peritoneal dialysis) require intravenous iron on a 
regular basis. However, parenteral iron may cause more harm than benefit. 
With the exception of patients on haemodialysis the haemoglobin response is 
not significantly faster with the parenteral route than the oral route. 

Megaloblastic anaemias 

Megaloblastic anaemias result from a lack of either vitamin B12 
(hydroxocobalamin) or folate or both. The clinical features of folate-deficient 
megaloblastic anaemia are similar to those of vitamin B12 deficiency except 
that the accompanying severe neuropathy does not occur; it is essential to 
establish the underlying cause in every case. Hydroxocobalamin is used to treat 
vitamin B12 deficiency whether due to dietary deficiency or malabsorption 
(including pernicious anaemia). Pernicious anaemia is due to a lack of intrinsic 
factor, which is essential for vitamin B12 absorption. 
Folate deficiency due to poor nutrition, pregnancy, use of antiepileptics, or 
malabsorption is treated with folic acid. Folic acid should not, however, be 
administered without vitamin B12 in undiagnosed megaloblastic anaemia 
because of the risk of precipitating neurological changes due to the underlying 
vitamin B12 deficiency. 
Preparations containing a ferrous salt and folic acid are used for the 
prevention of megaloblastic anaemia in pregnancy. The low doses of folic acid 

248 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

in these preparations are inadequate for the treatment of megaloblastic 
anaemias.  

Prevention of neural tube defects 

An adequate intake of folic acid before conception and during early pregnancy 
reduces the risk of neural tube defects in babies. Therefore, women planning a 
pregnancy should receive sufficient folic acid before conception and in the first 
12 weeks of pregnancy; folic acid may be given as a food or as a medicinal 
supplement in a dose of 400–500 micrograms daily. A woman who has not 
received supplementary folic acid and suspects that she might be pregnant 
should start taking folic acid at once and continue until week 12 of pregnancy. 
Women at increased risk of giving birth to a baby with neural tube defects (for 
example, history of neural tube defect in a previous child) should receive a 
higher dose of folic acid, approximately 5 mg daily, starting before conception 
and continuing for 12 weeks after conception. Women taking antiepileptic 
medication should be counselled by their doctor before starting folic acid (see 
also section 5). 

Ferrous salt 
Oral liquid: equivalent to 25 mg iron (as sulfate)/ml. 
Tablet: equivalent to 60 mg iron. 

Uses: iron-deficiency anaemia. 
Contraindications: haemosiderosis, haemochromatosis; any form of anaemia 
not caused by iron deficiency; patients receiving repeated blood 
transfusions; parenteral iron therapy. 

Precautions: should not be administered for longer than 6 months; pregnancy; 
peptic ulcer, regional enteritis, ulcerative colitis, intestinal strictures, 
diverticula; interactions: Appendix 1. 

NOTE: Overdosage: see section 4.2. 
Dose:  
Iron-deficiency anaemia, by mouth, ADULT, elemental iron, 100–200 mg daily in 
divided doses. 

Prevention of iron-deficiency anaemia (in those at particular risk), by mouth, 
ADULT (woman), elemental iron 60 mg daily; CHILD under 5 years, 
elemental iron, 2 mg/kg daily (maximum, 30 mg), CHILD over 5 years, 
elemental iron, 30 mg daily; in women and children over 5 years, folic acid 
may also be given. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Although iron preparations are best absorbed on an empty 
stomach, they may be taken after food to reduce gastrointestinal adverse effects; they 
may discolour stools. Liquid preparations containing iron salts should be well diluted 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 249 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

with water (and if possible swallowed through a drinking straw to prevent discoloration 
of the teeth). 

Adverse effects: constipation, diarrhoea, dark stools, nausea, epigastric pain, 
gastrointestinal irritation; long-term or excessive administration may cause 
haemosiderosis. 

Ferrous salt + folic acid 
Tablet: equivalent to 60 mg iron + 400 micrograms folic acid. 

Uses: prevention of iron and folic acid deficiencies in pregnancy. 
NOTE: low doses of folic acid in the combination preparations above are inadequate 
for treatment of megaloblastic anaemia; overdosage: see section 4.2; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 
Dose:  
Severe anaemia, by mouth, ADULT, elemental iron, 120 mg + folic acid 
400 micrograms daily for 3 months; CHILD under 2 years, elemental iron, 
25 mg + folic acid 100–400 micrograms daily for 3 months; CHILD 
2–12 years, elemental iron 60 mg + folic acid, 400 micrograms daily for 
3 months. 

Prevention of iron and folate deficiencies in pregnancy, by mouth, ADULT, 
elemental iron, 100 mg + folic acid, 350–400 micrograms daily throughout 
pregnancy. 

Adverse effects: see Ferrous salt. 

Folic acid 
Tablet: 1 mg; 5 mg. 

Uses: treatment of folate-deficiency megaloblastic anaemia; prevention of 
neural tube defects in pregnancy. 

Contraindications: should never be given without vitamin B12 in undiagnosed 
megaloblastic anaemia or other vitamin B12 deficiency states because of the 
risk of precipitating subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord; 
folate-dependent malignant disease. 

Precautions: women receiving antiepileptic therapy (need counselling before 
starting folic acid, see also note above); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of folate-deficiency, megaloblastic anaemia, by mouth, ADULT, 5 mg 
daily for 4 months (in pregnancy continued to term); up to 15 mg daily may 
be necessary in malabsorption states. 

250 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

Prevention of first occurrence of neural tube defects, by mouth, ADULT,  
400–500 micrograms daily before conception and during the first 12 weeks 
of pregnancy. 

Prevention of recurrence of neural tube defects, by mouth, ADULT, 5 mg daily 
(reduced to 4 mg daily, if suitable preparation available) from at least 
4 weeks before conception until 12th week of pregnancy. 

Hydroxocobalamin 
Injection: 1 mg in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: megaloblastic anaemias due to vitamin B12 deficiency. 
Precautions: except in emergencies, should not be given before diagnosis 
confirmed; monitor serum potassium levels (arrhythmias secondary to 
hypokalaemia in early therapy). 

Dose:  
Megaloblastic anaemia without neurological involvement, by intramuscular 
injection, ADULT and CHILD, initially 1 mg 3 times a week for 2 weeks, then 
1 mg every 3 months. 

Megaloblastic anaemia with neurological involvement, by intramuscular injection, 
ADULT and CHILD, initially 1 mg on alternate days until no further 
improvement occurs, then 1 mg every 2 months. 

Prophylaxis of macrocytic anaemias, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 
1 mg every 2–3 months. 

Tobacco amblyopia and Leber optic atrophy, by intramuscular injection, ADULT 
and CHILD, 1 mg daily for 2 weeks, then 1 mg twice weekly until no further 
improvement, then 1 mg every 1–3 months. 

Adverse effects: nausea, headache, dizziness; fever, hypersensitivity reactions 
including rash and pruritus; pain at injection site; hypokalaemia during initial 
treatment. 

10.2 Medicines affecting coagulation 

Anticoagulants are used to prevent thrombus formation or extension of an 
existing thrombus in the slower-moving venous side of the circulation, where 
the thrombus consists of a fibrin web enmeshed with platelets and red cells. 
They are therefore used widely in the prevention and treatment of deep-vein 
thrombosis in the legs, prophylaxis of embolization in rheumatic heart disease 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 251 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

and atrial fibrillation and to prevent thrombi forming on prosthetic heart 
valves. 
Heparin sodium is a parenteral anticoagulant that initiates anticoagulation 
rapidly but has a short duration of action. The low molecular weight heparins 
have a longer duration of action. For patients at high risk of bleeding, heparin 
sodium is more suitable than the low molecular weight heparins because its 
effect can be terminated rapidly by stopping the infusion. 
For the treatment of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism 
heparin sodium is given as an intravenous loading dose, followed by 
continuous intravenous infusion (using an infusion pump) or by intermittent 
subcutaneous injection. An oral anticoagulant is started at the same time as the 
heparin. The heparin needs to be continued for at least 5 days, until the oral 
anticoagulant has taken effect and the prothrombin time (usually reported as 
the international normalized ratio or INR) has been in the therapeutic range 
for 2 consecutive days. Laboratory monitoring is essential on a daily basis. 
Heparin sodium is also used in regimens for the management of myocardial 
infarction (section 12.5), the management of unstable angina (section 12.9), 
acute peripheral arterial occlusion and in dialysis. 
In patients undergoing general surgery, low-dose heparin by subcutaneous 
injection is used to prevent postoperative deep-vein thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism in high risk patients (those with obesity, malignant 
disease, history of deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, patients 
over 40 years, those with an established thrombophilic disorder or those 
undergoing major or complicated surgery). It is also of value in high-risk 
medical patients, for example, those who are obese, have heart failure, or are 
confined to bed. 
If haemorrhage occurs it is usually sufficient to withdraw heparin, but if rapid 
reversal of the effects of heparin is required, protamine sulfate is a specific 
antidote. 
Oral anticoagulants take at least 48–72 hours for the anticoagulant effect to 
develop fully; if an immediate effect is needed, heparin must be given 
concomitantly (see above). Warfarin is indicated in deep-vein thrombosis, 
pulmonary embolism, for patients with atrial fibrillation who are at risk of 
embolization, and for those with mechanical prosthetic heart valves (to 
prevent emboli developing on the valves); oral anticoagulants should not be 
used as first-line therapy in cerebral thrombosis or peripheral arterial occlusion. 
The main adverse effect of oral anticoagulants is haemorrhage. Prothrombin 
time should be checked on a daily basis initially, and then at longer intervals 
depending on response. 
If severe haemorrhage occurs, stop warfarin and give phytomenadione 
(vitamin K) by slow intravenous injection. 

252 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

Anticoagulants in pregnancy 

Oral anticoagulants are teratogenic and should not be given in the first 
trimester of pregnancy. Women at risk of pregnancy should be warned of this 
danger since stopping warfarin before the 6th week of gestation may largely 
avoid the risk of fetal abnormality. Oral anticoagulants cross the placenta, 
giving rise to the risk of placental or fetal haemorrhage, especially during the 
last few weeks of pregnancy and at delivery. Therefore, if at all possible, oral 
anticoagulants should be avoided in pregnancy, especially in the first and third 
trimester. Difficult decisions may have to be made, particularly in women with 
prosthetic heart valves or with a history of recurrent venous thrombosis or 
pulmonary embolism. 

Haemophilia  

Desmopressin [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] by injection may 
aid haemostasis and be useful in mild forms of haemophilia. For minor 
procedures, including dental surgery, it may circumvent the need for factor 
VIII. For the use of factor VIII and factor IX in haemophilia, see section 11.2. 

Heparin sodium 
Injection: 1000 IU/ml; 5000 IU/ml; 20 000 IU/ml in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: treatment and prophylaxis of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism; unstable angina (section 12.1); ischaemic stroke (section 12.5). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to heparin; haemophilia and other 
haemorrhagic disorders, thrombocytopenia, peptic ulcer, recent cerebral 
haemorrhage, severe hypertension, severe liver or renal disease; after major 
trauma or recent surgery (especially to eye or nervous system); acute 
bacterial endocarditis. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal failure (Appendix 4); the 
elderly; hypersensitivity to low molecular weight heparins; spinal or epidural 
anaesthesia (risk of spinal haematoma); pregnancy (Appendix 2); diabetes 
mellitus, acidosis, concomitant potassium-sparing drugs (increased risk of 
hyperkalaemia); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Treatment of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, by intravenous 
injection, ADULT, loading dose of 5000 IU (10,000 IU in severe pulmonary 
embolism) followed by continuous intravenous infusion of  
15–25 IU/kg/hour or by subcutaneous injection of 15,000 IU every  
12 hours; laboratory monitoring is essential, preferably on a daily basis and 
dose adjusted accordingly; by intravenous injection, SMALL ADULT and CHILD, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 253 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

lower loading dose, then by continuous intravenous infusion, 15–25 IU/kg/hour 
or by subcutaneous injection, 250 IU/kg every 12 hours. 

Prophylaxis in general surgery, by subcutaneous injection, ADULT, 5000 IU 2 hours 
before surgery, then every 8–12 hours for 7 days or until patient is ambulant 
(monitoring not needed); PREGNANT WOMAN, 5000–10,000 IU every 
12 hours. 

NOTE: Not intended to cover prosthetic heart valve management in pregnancy, which 
requires specialist management). 

Adverse effects: immune-mediated thrombocytopenia usually develops  
6–10 days after commencement of therapy (requires immediate withdrawal 
of heparin); haemorrhage, skin necrosis, hypersensitivity reactions including 
urticaria, angioedema, and anaphylaxis; osteoporosis after prolonged use 
and rarely alopecia. 

Phytomenadione 
Injection: 10 mg/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 10 mg. 

Uses: antagonist to warfarin; treatment and prophylaxis against haemorrhagic 
disease of the newborn. 

Precautions: elderly (reduce dose); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); not an 
antidote to heparin; pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Warfarin-induced hypoprothrombinaemia; no bleeding or minor bleeding, by 
slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 500 micrograms or by mouth, ADULT, up to 
5 mg; moderate haemorrhage, by mouth or by intramuscular injection, ADULT, 
10–20 mg; severe haemorrhage, ADULT, by slow intravenous injection, 5–10 mg. 

Treatment of haemorrhagic disease of the newborn, by intravenous or 
intramuscular injection, NEONATE, 1 mg, with further doses if necessary at  
8-hour intervals. 

Prophylaxis of haemorrhagic disease of the newborn, by intramuscular injection, 
NEONATE, 0.5–1 mg as single dose or by mouth, 2 mg, followed by a second 
dose after 4–7 days and for breastfed babies a third dose after 1 month. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including flushing, dyspnoea, 
bronchospasm, dizziness, hypotension, and respiratory or circulatory 
collapse (which may be due to the polyethoxylated castor oil surfactant used 
in some injection formulations rather than due to phytomenadione). 

254 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



10. Medicines affecting the blood 

Protamine sulfate 
Injection: 10 mg/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 

Uses: antidote to overdosage with heparin sodium. 
Precautions: if used in excess, protamine sulfate has an anticoagulant effect; 
previous treatment with protamine or protamine insulin, fish allergies, and 
men who are infertile or who have had a vasectomy (increased risk of 
allergic reactions). 

Dose:  

Heparin overdose, by intravenous injection over approximately 10 minutes, ADULT, 
1 mg neutralizes 80–100 IU heparin sodium when given within 15 minutes; 
if longer time, less protamine is needed as heparin is rapidly excreted. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, lassitude, flushing, hypotension, 
bradycardia, dyspnoea, allergic reactions including angioedema and 
anaphylaxis. 

Warfarin 
Tablet: 1 mg; 2 mg; 5 mg (sodium salt). 

Warfarin is a representative oral anticoagulant. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: prophylaxis of embolization in rheumatic heart disease and atrial 
fibrillation; prophylaxis of thrombi formation after insertion of prosthetic 
heart valve; prophylaxis and treatment of venous thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism; transient ischaemic attacks (section 12.5). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (see note above and Appendix 2); peptic ulcer, 
severe hypertension, bacterial endocarditis. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal failure (Appendix 4), 
recent surgery, breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid cranberry juice (risk of 
potentiating anticoagulant effect); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
NOTE. Wherever possible, the base-line prothrombin time (INR) should be 
determined before the initial dose is given. 

Prophylaxis and treatment of thromboembolic disorders, by mouth, ADULT, 
usual induction dose, 10 mg daily for 2 days, according to the individual 
patient; the subsequent dose depends upon the prothrombin time; the usual 
daily maintenance dose, 3–9 mg daily taken at the same time each day. 

Adverse effects: haemorrhage; hypersensitivity, rash, alopecia, diarrhoea, 
unexplained drop in haematocrit, “purple toes”, skin necrosis, jaundice, 
hepatic dysfunction, nausea, vomiting, pancreatitis. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 255 



11. Blood products and plasma substitutes 

 

 

 

SECTION 11:  
Blood products and plasma substitutes 

11.1 Plasma substitutes 257 

11.2 Plasma fractions for specific use 259 

256 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



11. Blood products and plasma substitutes 

Fluid requirements including that for blood must be assessed before, during, 
and after major surgery. Replacement fluids should correspond as nearly as 
possible in volume and composition to those lost. Blood transfusion is 
essential to restore oxygen-carrying capacity when more than 15% of the 
circulating blood volume is lost but should be avoided whenever screening for 
human immunodeficiency viruses and hepatitis B virus is impracticable. 
Isotonic sodium chloride solution may be used for short-term volume 
replacement. Plasma expanders such as dextran 70 or polygeline may be useful. 
Provided renal function is maintained, fluid is most simply replaced by 
intravenous administration of sodium chloride solution (sodium chloride, 
9 mg/ml or 0.9%) or the more physiologically appropriate compound solution 
of sodium lactate (section 26.2).  
In medical emergencies, there is usually an existing fluid deficit which must be 
assessed and corrected before surgery. Isotonic glucose/sodium chloride 
mixtures (most commonly, a mixture of glucose, 4% and sodium chloride, 
0.18%) are preferred in children but injudicious use of such fluids may cause 
dilutional hyponatraemia, especially following illness or injury which increase 
the secretion of antidiuretic hormones (section 26.2).  
When fluids are administered intravenously for more than 24 hours, potassium 
chloride (section 26.2) is required to prevent potassium depletion. In order to 
avoid serious arrhythmias, especially in patients with impaired renal function, 
the required dose of potassium should be determined, whenever possible, by 
monitoring plasma concentrations of potassium.  
See also section 26 (Solutions correcting water, electrolyte, and acid–base 
disturbances).   

11.1 Plasma substitutes 

Dextran 70 and polygeline [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] are 
macromolecular substances which are metabolized slowly; they may be used to 
expand and maintain blood volume in shock arising from conditions such as 
burns or septicaemia. They are rarely needed when shock is due to sodium and 
water depletion as, in these circumstances, the shock responds to water and 
electrolyte repletion.   
Plasma substitutes should not be used to maintain plasma volume in 
conditions such as burns or peritonitis where there is loss of plasma protein, 
water, and electrolytes over periods of several days. In these situations, plasma 
or plasma protein fractions containing large amounts of albumin should be 
given.   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 257 



11. Blood products and plasma substitutes 

Plasma substitutes may be used as an immediate short-term measure to treat 
massive haemorrhage until blood is available, but large volumes of some 
plasma substitutes can increase the risk of bleeding by depleting coagulation 
factors. Dextran may interfere with blood group cross-matching or 
biochemical measurements and therefore these should be carried out before 
the infusion is started.   
Plasma substitutes are often used in very ill patients whose condition is 
unstable. Close monitoring is required, and fluid and electrolyte therapy should 
be adjusted according to the patient’s condition at all times.  

Dextran 70 
Injectable solution: 6%. 

Dextran is a representative plasma substitute. Various preparations can serve as 
alternatives (polygeline, 3.5% solution for injection is considered equivalent). 

Uses: short-term blood volume expansion. 
Contraindications: severe congestive heart failure; renal failure; bleeding 
disorders such as thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenaemia. 

Precautions: cardiac disease, liver disease (Appendix 5), renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); monitor urine output; avoid haematocrit falling below 25–
30%; where possible, monitor central venous pressure; can interfere with 
blood group cross-matching and biochemical tests (take samples before 
start of infusion); monitor for hypersensitivity reactions; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2). 

Dose:  
Short-term blood volume expansion, by rapid intravenous infusion, ADULT,  
500–1000 ml initially, followed by a further 500 ml if necessary (total dosage 
should not exceed 20 ml/kg during the initial 24 hours); if required 
10 ml/kg daily may be given for a further 2 days (treatment should not 
continue for longer than 3 days); CHILD, total dosage should not exceed 
20 ml/kg. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including fever, nasal congestion, 
joint pains, urticaria, hypotension, bronchospasm, and rarely, severe 
anaphylactoid reactions; transient increase in bleeding time. 

258 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



11. Blood products and plasma substitutes 

11.2 Plasma fractions for specific use 

Blood coagulation factors 
Factor VIII is essential for blood clotting and the maintenance of effective 
haemostasis; von Willebrand factor is a mediator in platelet aggregation and 
also acts as a carrier for factor VIII. Blood coagulation factors VII, IX, and X 
are essential for the conversion of factor II (prothrombin) to thrombin. 
Deficiency in any of these factors results in haemophilia. Bleeding episodes in 
haemophilia require prompt treatment with replacement therapy. Factor VIII, 
used for the treatment of haemophilia A, is a sterile freeze-dried powder 
containing the blood coagulation factor VIII fraction prepared from pooled 
human venous plasma. Standard factor VIII preparations also contain von 
Willebrand factor and may be used to treat von Willebrand disease. Highly 
purified preparations, including recombinant factor VIII, are available; they are 
indicated for the treatment of haemophilia A but do not contain sufficient von 
Willebrand factor for use in the management of von Willebrand disease. 
Factor IX complex is a sterile freeze-dried concentrate of blood coagulation 
factors II, VII, IX, and X derived from fresh venous plasma. Factor IX 
complex, which is used for the treatment of haemophilia B may also be used 
for the treatment of bleeding due to deficiencies of factor II, VII, and X. High 
purity preparations of factor IX which do not contain clinically effective 
amounts of factor II, VII, and X are available. A recombinant factor IX 
preparation is also available. 

Factor IX Complex (Coagulation Factors, II, VII, IX, X) 
Concentrate 

Dried. 
Plasma fractions should comply with the WHO Requirements for the Collection, 
Processing and Quality Control of Blood, Blood Components and Plasma Derivatives 
(Revised 1992). WHO Technical Report Series, No. 840, 1994, Annex 2. 

Factor IX complex concentrate is a complementary list preparation and a representative 
coagulation factor preparation. Various preparations can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: replacement therapy for factor IX deficiency in haemophilia B; bleeding 
due to deficiencies of factors II, VII, or X. 

Contraindications: disseminated intravascular coagulation.  
Precautions: risk of thrombosis (probably less risk with highly purified 
preparations). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 259 



11. Blood products and plasma substitutes 

Dose:  
Haemophilia B, by slow intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, according to 
patient’s needs and specific preparation used. 

Treatment of bleeding due to deficiencies in factor II, VII or X as well as IX, 
by slow intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, according to patient’s needs.  

Adverse effects: allergic reactions including chills, and fever. 

Factor VIII concentrate 
Dried. 

Plasma fractions should comply with the WHO Requirements for the Collection, 
Processing and Quality Control of Blood, Blood Components and Plasma Derivatives 
(Revised 1992). WHO Technical Report Series, No. 840, 1994, Annex 2. 

Factor VIII concentrate is a complementary preparation and a representative. 
coagulation factor preparation. Various preparations can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: control of haemorrhage in haemophilia A. 
Precautions: intravascular haemolysis after large or frequently repeated doses 
in patients with blood groups A, B, or AB (less likely with high potency, 
highly purified concentrates). 

Dose:  
Haemophilia A, by slow intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, according to 
patient’s needs. 

Adverse effects: allergic reactions including chills, fever. 

Human normal immunoglobulin 
Intramuscular administration: 16% protein solution.  
Intravenous administration: 5%; 10% protein solution. 

Normal immunoglobulin 
Normal immunoglobulin solution is administered by intravenous infusion for 
primary immunodeficiencies and immunomodulation in autoimmune disease 
including Guillain-Barré syndrome and Kawasaki disease. Solutions for 
intramuscular and subcutaneous injection are used for primary immune 
deficiency. Normal immunoglobulin should be used in hospital settings where 
specialist supervision is available. 
Normal immunoglobulin (human, polyvalent) 
Plasma fractions should comply with the Requirements for the Collection, 
Processing and Quality Control of Blood, Blood Components and Plasma 
Derivatives (Revised 1992). WHO Technical Report Series No. 840, 1994, 
Annex 2. 

260 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



11. Blood products and plasma substitutes 

NOTE. Formulations from different manufacturers vary and should not be regarded as 
equivalent; consult individual manufacturer’s product literature. 

Uses: replacement therapy in primary immunodeficiency, Kawasaki disease. 
Precautions: monitor vital signs; interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose: 
NOTE. National recommendations may vary. Consult individual manufacturer’s 
product literature for dose and administration recommendations for specific diseases; 
recommended doses may vary from those listed below. 

Replacement therapy in primary immunodeficiencies: Initial loading 
intravenously in divided doses until serum IgG level is > 6 g/l. Maintenance 
doses by intravenous, subcutaneous or intramuscular routes: normally 0.4 – 
0.8 g/kg/month for children and adults. Dose to be titrated depending on 
inter-current infections or trough serum IgG level. Intravenous doses may 
be given at one, two, 3 or 4 week intervals. Subcutaneous doses may be 
given at 1, 2, 3 , 4 or 7 day intervals.  

For immunomodulation in autoimmune conditions: Maximum recommended 
dose is 2g/kg over at least 48 hours. Depending on specific autoimmune 
disease: 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days or 0.8-1 g/kg the first day and repeated 
once if indicated.  

ADMINISTRATION. Infusion rates of less than 8 g per hour are recommended. 
Immunoglobulin should be administered under the supervision of an immunologist or 
other experienced physician. In general, this should be in a hospital with adequate 
facilities for monitoring the infusion as well as the condition for which it is being 
administered, until the patient is stable, at which point treatment at home can be 
considered after formal training in an expert centre.  

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, headache (may develop 24 hours after 
infusion); dizziness, dry mouth, chills, sweating, hypothermia, fever, eczema, 
rash, urticaria, hypotension, wheezing; anaphylactoid reactions also reported; 
with immunomodulatory doses also immune haemolysis, aseptic meningism, 
increased plasma viscosity, hypercoagulopathy, and renal impairment. 

 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 261 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

 

 

SECTION 12:  
Cardiovascular medicines 

12.1 Antianginal medicines 263 

12.2 Antiarrhythmic medicines 268 

12.3 Antihypertensive medicines 275 

12.4 Medicines used in heart failure 283 

12.5 Antithrombotic medicines 289 

12.6 Lipid-lowering agents 292 

262 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

12.1 Antianginal medicines 

The three main types of angina are: 

- stable angina (angina of effort), where atherosclerosis restricts blood flow in 
the coronary vessels; attacks are usually caused by exertion and relieved by 
rest;  

- unstable angina (acute coronary insufficiency), which is considered to be an 
intermediate stage between stable angina and myocardial infarction;  

- Prinzmetal angina (variant angina), caused by coronary vasospasm, in which 
attacks occur at rest.  

Management depends on the type of angina and may include drug treatment, 
coronary artery bypass surgery, or percutaneous transluminal coronary 
angioplasty. 

Stable angina 
Drugs are used both for the relief of acute pain and for prophylaxis (to reduce 
the risk of further attacks); they include organic nitrates, beta-adrenoceptor 
antagonists (beta-blockers), and calcium-channel blockers. 

Nitrates 

Organic nitrates have a vasodilating effect; they are sometimes used alone, 
especially in the elderly patients with infrequent symptoms. Tolerance leading 
to reduced antianginal effect is often seen in patients taking prolonged-action 
nitrate formulations. Evidence suggests that patients should have a “nitrate-
free” interval to prevent the development of tolerance. Adverse effects such as 
flushing, headache, and postural hypotension may limit nitrate therapy but 
tolerance to these effects also soon develops. The short-acting sublingual 
formulation of glyceryl trinitrate is used both for prevention of angina before 
exercise or other stress and for rapid treatment of chest pain. A sublingual 
tablet of isosorbide dinitrate is more stable in storage than glyceryl trinitrate 
and is useful in patients who require nitrates infrequently; it has a slower onset 
of action, but effects persist for several hours. 

Beta-blockers 

Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (beta-blockers), such as atenolol, block beta-
adrenergic receptors in the heart, and thereby decrease heart rate and 
myocardial contractility and oxygen consumption, particularly during exercise. 
Beta-blockers are first-line therapy for patients with effort-induced chronic 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 263 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

stable angina; they improve exercise tolerance, relieve symptoms, reduce the 
severity and frequency of angina attacks, and increase the anginal threshold. 
Beta-blockers should be withdrawn gradually to avoid precipitating an anginal 
attack; they should not be used in patients with underlying coronary 
vasospasm (Prinzmetal angina). 
Beta-blockers may precipitate asthma and should not be used in patients with a 
history of asthma or bronchospasm. Some, including atenolol, have less effect 
on beta2 (bronchial) receptors and are therefore relatively cardioselective. 
Although the cardioselective beta-blockers have less effect on airway resistance 
they are not free of this effect and should be avoided in patients with asthma 
or bronchospasm; in rare situations where there is no suitable alternative a 
cardioselective beta-blocker can be given with extreme caution under specialist 
supervision. 
Beta-blockers should not be given to patients who have incipient ventricular 
failure, second- or third-degree atrioventricular block, or peripheral vascular 
disease. 
Beta-blockers should be used with caution in diabetes. Beta-blockers can 
produce hyperglycaemia or they can enhance the hypoglycaemic effect of 
insulin and may precipitate hypoglycaemia. 

Calcium-channel blockers 

A long-acting dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker (such as amlodipine, 
usual dose, 5 mg once daily, section 12.3) can be added to beta-blocker 
treatment if necessary for the control of moderate stable angina. For those in 
whom a beta-blocker is inappropriate, verapamil may be given as an 
alternative to treat stable angina. Calcium-channel blockers interfere with the 
inward movement of calcium ions through the slow channels in heart and 
vascular smooth muscle cell membranes, leading to relaxation of vascular 
smooth muscle. Myocardial contractility may be reduced, the formation and 
propagation of electrical impulses within the heart may be depressed and 
coronary or systemic vascular tone may be diminished. Calcium-channel 
blockers are used to improve exercise tolerance in patients with chronic stable 
angina due to coronary atherosclerosis or with abnormally small coronary 
arteries and limited vasodilator reserve. 
Calcium-channel blockers can also be used in patients with unstable angina 
with a vasospastic origin, such as Prinzmetal angina, and in patients in whom 
alterations in cardiac tone may influence the angina threshold. 

Unstable angina 
Unstable angina requires prompt aggressive treatment to prevent progression 
to myocardial infarction. 

264 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Initial treatment is with acetylsalicylic acid to inhibit platelet aggregation, 
followed by heparin (section 10.2). Nitrates and beta-blockers are given to 
relieve ischaemia; if beta-blockers are contraindicated, verapamil is an 
alternative, provided left ventricular function is adequate (see also section 12.5). 

Prinzmetal angina 
Treatment is similar to that for unstable angina, except that a calcium-channel 
blocker is used instead of a beta-blocker. 

Atenolol 
Tablet: 50 mg; 100 mg. 

Atenolol is a representative beta-adrenoceptor antagonist (beta-blocker). Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives.   

Uses: angina and myocardial infarction (see also section 12.5); arrhythmias 
(section 12.2); hypertension (section 12.3); migraine prophylaxis 
(section 7.2).   

Contraindications: history of asthma or bronchospasm (unless no alternative, 
in which case use with extreme caution and under specialist supervision); 
uncontrolled heart failure, Prinzmetal angina, marked bradycardia, 
hypotension, sick sinus syndrome, second- and third-degree atrioventricular 
block, cardiogenic shock; metabolic acidosis; severe peripheral arterial 
disease; phaeochromocytoma (unless used with an alpha-blocker). 

Precautions: avoid abrupt withdrawal especially in ischaemic heart disease; 
history of obstructive airway disease (use with caution and monitor lung 
function (see also Contraindications above); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); first-degree atrioventricular block; portal 
hypertension (liver function deteriorates); renal impairment (reduce dose; 
Appendix 4); diabetes mellitus (small decrease in glucose tolerance, which 
can mask symptoms of hypoglycaemia); history of hypersensitivity 
[increased reaction to allergens, also reduced response to epinephrine 
(adrenaline)]; myasthenia gravis; interactions: Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Angina, by mouth, ADULT, 50 mg once daily, increased if necessary to 50 mg 
twice daily or 100 mg once daily. 

Unstable angina and acute myocardial infarction (early intervention within 
12 hours), by intravenous injection over 5 minutes, ADULT, 5 mg, then by mouth, 
50 mg after 15 minutes, followed by 50 mg after 12 hours, then 100 mg 
daily.   

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances including nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, constipation, and abdominal cramp; fatigue; cold hands and feet; 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 265 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

exacerbation of intermittent claudication and Raynaud phenomenon; 
bronchospasm; bradycardia, heart failure, conduction disorders, 
hypotension; sleep disturbances including nightmares; depression, 
confusion; hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia; exacerbation of psoriasis; rash, 
dry eyes, and oculomucocutaneous syndrome (reversible on withdrawal) 
rarely reported. 

Glyceryl trinitrate 
Tablet (sublingual): 500 micrograms. 

NOTE. Glyceryl trinitrate tablets are unstable. They should therefore be dispensed in 
glass or stainless steel containers, and closed with a foil-lined cap which contains no 
wadding. No more than 100 tablets should be dispensed at one time, and any unused 
tablets should be discarded 8 weeks after opening the container. 

Uses: prophylaxis and treatment of angina. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to nitrates; hypotension; hypovolaemia; 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, aortic stenosis, cardiac 
tamponade, constrictive pericarditis, mitral stenosis; marked anaemia; head 
trauma; cerebral haemorrhage; angle-closure glaucoma. 

Precautions: severe hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hypothyroidism; malnutrition; hypothermia; recent history of 
myocardial infarction; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Angina (acute attack), sublingually, ADULT, 0.5–1 mg, repeated as required. 
Adverse effects: throbbing headache; flushing; dizziness, postural hypotension; 
tachycardia; paradoxical bradycardia also reported. 

Isosorbide dinitrate 
Tablet (sublingual): 5 mg. 

Isosorbide dinitrate is a representative nitrate vasodilator. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: prophylaxis and treatment of angina; heart failure (section 12.4). 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to nitrates; hypotension; hypovolaemia; 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, aortic stenosis, cardiac 
tamponade, constrictive pericarditis, mitral stenosis; marked anaemia; head 
trauma; cerebral haemorrhage; angle-closure glaucoma. 

Precautions: severe hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); hypothyroidism; malnutrition; hypothermia; recent history of 
myocardial infarction; interactions: Appendix 1. 

266 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

TOLERANCE. Patients taking isosorbide dinitrate for the long-term management of 
angina may often develop tolerance to the antianginal effect; this can be avoided by 
giving the second of 2 daily doses of longer-acting oral presentations after an 8-hour 
rather than a 12-hour interval, thus ensuring a nitrate-free interval each day. 
Dose:  

Angina (acute attack), sublingually, ADULT, 2.5–10 mg, repeated as required. 
Angina prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 20–240 mg daily in divided doses (see 
advice on Tolerance above). 

Adverse effects: throbbing headache; flushing; dizziness, postural hypotension; 
tachycardia; paradoxical bradycardia also reported. 

Verapamil 
Tablet: 40 mg; 80 mg (hydrochloride). 

NOTE. Sustained-release (prolonged-release) tablets are available. A proposal to 
include such a product in a national list of essential drugs should be supported by 
adequate documentation. 

Uses: angina, including stable, unstable, and Prinzmetal; arrhythmias 
(section 12.2); migraine prophylaxis (section 7.2). 

Contraindications: hypotension, bradycardia, second- and third-degree 
atrioventricular block, sinoatrial block, sick sinus syndrome; cardiogenic 
shock; history of heart failure or significantly impaired left ventricular 
function (even if controlled by therapy); atrial flutter or fibrillation 
complicating Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome; porphyria. 

Precautions: first-degree atrioventricular block; acute phase of myocardial 
infarction (avoid if bradycardia, hypotension, or left ventricular failure 
present); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); children (specialist advice only); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid grapefruit 
juice (may affect metabolism); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Angina, by mouth, ADULT, 80–120 mg 3 times daily (120 mg 3 times daily 
usually required in Prinzmetal angina). 

Adverse effects: constipation; less commonly nausea, vomiting, flushing, 
headache, dizziness, fatigue, and ankle oedema; rarely allergic reactions 
including pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, and erythema multiforme 
(Stevens-Johnson syndrome); myalgia, arthralgia, paraesthesia, 
erythromelalgia; increased prolactin concentration; gynaecomastia and 
gingival hyperplasia on long-term treatment; hypotension, heart failure, 
bradycardia, heart block, and asystole (due to negative inotropic effect) with 
high doses. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 267 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

12.2 Antiarrhythmic medicines 

Treatment of arrhythmias requires precise diagnosis of the type of arrhythmia, 
for which electrocardiography (ECG) is essential; underlying causes such as 
heart failure require appropriate treatment. 
Antiarrhythmics must be used cautiously since most drugs that are effective in 
treating arrhythmias can provoke them in some circumstances; this 
arrhythmogenic effect is often enhanced by hypokalaemia. When 
antiarrhythmic drugs are used in combination, their cumulative negative 
inotropic effects may be significant, particularly if myocardial function is 
impaired. 

Atrial fibrillation 
The increased ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation can be controlled with a beta-
adrenoceptor antagonist (beta-blocker) such as atenolol (section 12.1) or a 
calcium-channel blocker such as verapamil (section 12.1). Digoxin, a cardiac 
glycoside, slows the ventricular response and is particularly appropriate if atrial 
fibrillation is accompanied by congestive heart failure (see also section 12.4). 
Intravenous digoxin is rarely of value for rapid control of the ventricular rate 
because response may take many hours. If adequate control at rest or during 
exercise cannot be achieved readily verapamil may be introduced with digoxin, 
but it should be used with caution if ventricular function is impaired. 
Anticoagulants are indicated especially in valvular or myocardial disease, and in 
the elderly. Warfarin (section 10.2) is preferred to acetylsalicylic acid 
(section 12.5) in preventing emboli. If atrial fibrillation began within the 
previous 48 hours, and there does not appear to be a danger of 
thromboembolism, antiarrhythmic drugs, such as procainamide or quinidine, 
may be used to terminate the fibrillation or to maintain sinus rhythm after 
cardioversion. 

Atrial flutter 
Digoxin will sometimes slow the ventricular response. Reversion to sinus 
rhythm is best achieved by direct current electrical shock. If the arrhythmia is 
long-standing, treatment with an anticoagulant, such as warfarin, should be 
considered before cardioversion to prevent emboli. Intravenous verapamil 
reduces ventricular fibrillation during paroxysmal (sudden onset and 
intermittent) attacks of atrial flutter. An initial intravenous dose may be 
followed by oral treatment; hypotension may occur with high doses. Verapamil 
should not be used for tachyarrhythmias where the QRS complex is wide, 
unless a supraventricular origin has been established beyond doubt. If the 

268 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

flutter cannot be restored to sinus rhythm, antiarrhythmics such as quinidine 
can be used. 

Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia 
In most patients this remits spontaneously or can revert to sinus rhythm by 
reflex vagal stimulation. Failing this, intravenous injection of a beta-blocker or 
verapamil may be effective. Verapamil and a beta-blocker should never be 
administered concomitantly because of the risk of hypotension and asystole. 

Ventricular tachycardia 
Very rapid ventricular fibrillation causes profound circulatory collapse and 
must be treated immediately with direct current shock. In more stable patients 
intravenous lidocaine or procainamide may be used. After sinus rhythm is 
restored, drug therapy to prevent recurrence of ventricular tachycardia should 
be considered; a beta-adrenoceptor antagonist beta-blocker or verapamil may 
be effective. 
Torsades de pointes is a special form of ventricular tachycardia associated with 
prolongation of the QT interval; it may be congenital but is often drug-
induced. Initial treatment with intravenous infusion of magnesium sulfate 
(usual dose, 2 g over 10–15 minutes, repeated once if necessary) together with 
temporary pacing is usually effective. Prolonged QT interval may be treated 
with a beta-adrenoceptor antagonist beta-blocker (but not sotalol) and pacing; 
antiarrythmic drugs (including lidocaine) should be avoided because they can 
further prolong the QT interval. 

Bradyarrhythmias 
Sinus bradycardia (less than 50 beats/minute) associated with acute myocardial 
infarction may be treated with atropine (section 1.3). Temporary pacing may 
be required in unresponsive patients. Drugs are of limited value for increasing 
the sinus rate long term in the presence of intrinsic sinus node disease and 
permanent pacing is usually required. 

Cardiac arrest 
In cardiac arrest, epinephrine (adrenaline) is given by intravenous injection in a 
dose of 1 mg (10 ml of 1:10 000 solution) as part of the procedure for 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 

Atenolol 
Tablet: 50 mg; 100 mg. 

Atenolol is a representative beta-adrenoceptor antagonist (beta-blocker). Various drugs 
can serve as alternatives. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 269 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Uses: arrhythmias; angina and mycocardial infarction (section 12.1); 
hypertension (section 12.3); migraine prophylaxis (section 7.2). 

Contraindications: history of asthma or bronchospasm (unless no alternative, 
in which case, use with extreme caution and under specialist supervision); 
uncontrolled heart failure, Prinzmetal angina, marked bradycardia, 
hypotension, sick sinus syndrome, second- and third-degree atrioventricular 
block, cardiogenic shock; metabolic acidosis; severe peripheral arterial 
disease; phaeochromocytoma (unless used with an alpha-blocker). 

Precautions: avoid abrupt withdrawal especially in ischaemic heart disease; 
history of obstructive airway disease (use with caution and monitor lung 
function; see also Contraindications above); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); first-degree atrioventricular block; portal 
hypertension (liver function deteriorates); renal impairment (reduce dose; 
Appendix 4); diabetes mellitus (small decrease in glucose tolerance, which 
can mask symptoms of hypoglycaemia); history of hypersensitivity 
[increased reaction to allergens, also reduced response to epinephrine 
(adrenaline)]; myasthenia gravis; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Arrhythmias, by mouth, ADULT, 50 mg once daily, increased if necessary to 
50 mg twice daily or 100 mg once daily. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances including nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, constipation, and abdominal cramp; fatigue; cold hands and feet; 
exacerbation of intermittent claudication and Raynaud phenomenon; 
bronchospasm; bradycardia, heart failure, conduction disorders, 
hypotension; sleep disturbances including nightmares; depression, 
confusion; hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia; exacerbation of psoriasis; rare 
reports of rash, dry eyes and oculomucocutaneous syndrome (reversible on 
withdrawal) rarely reported. 

Digoxin 
Injection: 250 micrograms/ml in 2-ml ampoule.  
Oral liquid: 50 micrograms/ml. 
Tablet: 62.5 micrograms; 250 micrograms. 

Uses: supraventricular arrhythmias, particularly atrial fibrillation; heart failure 
(section 12.4). 

Contraindications: hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (unless also atrial 
fibrillation and heart failure); Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome or other 
accessory pathway, particularly if accompanied by atrial fibrillation; 
ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation; intermittent complete heart block; 
second-degree atrioventricular block. 

270 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Precautions: recent myocardial infarction; sick sinus syndrome; severe 
pulmonary disease; thyroid disease; the elderly (reduce dose); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); avoid hypokalaemia; avoid rapid intravenous 
administration (nausea and increased risk of arrhythmias); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Atrial fibrillation, by mouth, ADULT, initially 1–1.5 mg in divided doses over 
24 hours for rapid digitalization (or 250 micrograms once or twice daily if 
digitalization less urgent) followed by: 62.5–500 micrograms daily (higher 
dose may be divided), according to renal function and heart rate response; 
usual maintenance dose, 125–250 micrograms daily (lower dose more 
appropriate in the elderly). 

Emergency control of atrial fibrillation, by intravenous infusion over at least 
2 hours, ADULT, 0.75–1 mg. 

NOTE. Infusion dose may need to be reduced if digoxin or other cardiac glycoside has 
been given in previous 2 weeks. 

Adverse effects: usually only associated with high doses; gastrointestinal 
disturbances including anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and abdominal 
pain; visual disturbances, headache, fatigue, drowsiness, confusion, 
dizziness, delirium, hallucinations, depression; arrhythmias, heart block; 
rarely rash, and intestinal ischaemia; gynaecomastia on long-term use; 
thrombocytopenia reported. 

Epinephrine (adrenaline) 
Injection: 100 micrograms/ml (as acid tartrate or hydrochloride) in 10-ml 
ampoule. 

Uses: cardiac arrest; anaphylaxis (section 3); asthma (section 25.1). 
Precautions: heart disease, hypertension, arrhythmias, cerebrovascular disease; 
hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus; angle-closure glaucoma; second stage of 
labour; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Caution: different dilutions of epinephrine injection are used for different 

routes of administration. 
Cardiac arrest, by intravenous injection through a central line using epinephrine 
injection 1:10 000 (100 micrograms/ml), ADULT, 1 mg (10 ml), repeated at 
3-minute intervals if necessary. 

NOTE. If a central line is not in place, the same dose can be given via a peripheral vein, 
then flushed through with at least 20 ml sodium chloride, 0.9% (to expedite entry into 
the circulation). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 271 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Adverse effects: anxiety, tremor, tachycardia, headache, cold extremities; 
nausea, vomiting, sweating, weakness, dizziness, and hyperglycaemia also 
reported; in overdosage arrhythmias, cerebral haemorrhage, and pulmonary 
oedema. 

Lidocaine 
Injection: 20 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 

Uses: ventricular arrhythmias (especially after myocardial infarction); local 
anaesthesia (section 1.2). 

Contraindications: sinoatrial disorder, any grade of atrioventricular block or 
any other type of conduction disturbances, severe myocardial depression, 
acute porphyria or hypovolaemia. 

Precautions: lower dosage in congestive heart failure and following cardiac 
surgery; bradycardia; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); severe respiratory 
depression; the elderly; pregnancy (Appendix 2); and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Ventricular arrhythmias, by intravenous injection, ADULT, loading dose of  
50–100 mg (or 1–1.5 mg/kg) at a rate of 25–50 mg/minute, followed 
immediately by intravenous infusion of 1–4 mg/minute, with ECG monitoring 
of all patients (reduce infusion dose if required for longer than 24 hours). 

IMPORTANT. Following intravenous injection lidocaine has a short duration of action 
(15–20 minutes). If the intravenous infusion cannot be given immediately, the initial 
intravenous injection of 50–100 mg can be repeated if necessary once or twice at 
intervals of not less than 10 minutes. 

Adverse effects: dizziness, paraesthesia, drowsiness, confusion, apnoea, 
respiratory depression, coma, seizures and convulsions, hypotension; 
arrhythmias, heart block, cardiovascular collapse, bradycardia (may lead to 
cardiac arrest); nystagmus (often an early sign of lidocaine overdosage); 
hypersensitivity reactions also reported. 

Procainamide 
Injection: 100 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

Procainamide is a representative antiarrhythmic drug. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Procainamide is also a complementary list medicine for use when drugs on the core 
WHO Model List are known to be ineffective or inappropriate for a given patient. 

272 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Uses: severe ventricular arrhythmias, especially those resistant to lidocaine or 
those appearing after myocardial infarction; atrial tachycardia, atrial 
fibrillation; maintenance of sinus rhythm after cardioversion of atrial 
fibrillation. 

Contraindications: torsades de pointes, systemic lupus erythematosus, heart 
block, heart failure, hypotension. 

Precautions: the elderly, renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); asthma, myasthenia gravis, pregnancy (Appendix 2); 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); use only under specialist supervision; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Ventricular arrhythmias, by mouth, ADULT, up to 50 mg/kg daily in divided 
doses every 3–6 hours, preferably controlled by monitoring plasma 
procainamide concentration (therapeutic concentration usually within the 
range of 3–10 micrograms/ml). 

Ventricular arrhythmias, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 100 mg at a rate not 
exceeding 50 mg/minute, with ECG monitoring; may be repeated at  
5-minute intervals until arrhythmia controlled; maximum 1 g. 

Ventricular arrhythmias, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 500–600 mg over  
25–30 minutes, with ECG monitoring, followed by a maintenance dose of 
2–6 mg/minute; if further antiarrhythmic treatment is required, allow an 
interval of 3–4 hours after infusion before giving further drug therapy by 
mouth. 

Atrial arrhythmias, higher doses may be required. 
Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, rash, pruritus, urticaria, 
flushing, fever, myocardial depression, heart failure, angioedema, depression, 
dizziness, psychosis; blood disorders including leukopenia, haemolytic 
anaemia and agranulocytosis after prolonged treatment; lupus 
erythematosus-like syndrome; high plasma procainamide concentration may 
impair cardiac conduction. 

Quinidine 
Tablet: 200 mg (sulfate). 

Quinidine is a representative antiarrhythmic drug. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Quinidine is also a complementary list antiarrhythmic medicine for use when drugs on 
the core WHO Model List cannot be made available. 

NOTE. Quinidine sulfate, 200 mg or quinidine bisulfate, 250 mg. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 273 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Uses: suppression of supraventricular arrhythmias and ventricular arrhythmias; 
maintenance of sinus rhythm after cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. 

Contraindications: complete heart block. 
Precautions: partial heart block; extreme care in uncompensated heart failure, 
myocarditis, and severe myocardial damage; myasthenia gravis; acute 
infections or fever (symptoms may mask hypersensitivity reaction to 
quinidine; administer an initial test dose to exclude hypersensitivity); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Initial test dose, by mouth, ADULT, 200 mg. 
Arrhythmias, by mouth, ADULT, 200–400 mg 3–4 times daily, with frequent 
ECG monitoring; increased if necessary in supraventricular tachycardia to 
600 mg every 2–4 hours (maximum, 3–4 g daily). 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, 
anaphylaxis, purpura, pruritus, urticaria, fever, thrombocytopenia, 
agranulocytosis after prolonged treatment, psychosis, angioedema, 
hepatotoxicity, respiratory difficulties; cardiac effects including myocardial 
depression, heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias, and hypotension; 
cinchonism including tinnitus, impaired hearing, vertigo, headache, visual 
disturbances, abdominal pain, and confusion; lupus erythematosus-like 
syndrome. 

Verapamil 
Injection: 2.5 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 40 mg; 80 mg (hydrochloride). 

NOTE. Sustained-release (prolonged-release) tablets are available. A proposal to 
include such a product in a national list of essential drugs should be supported by 
adequate documentation. 

Uses: supraventricular arrhythmias; angina (section 12.1); migraine prophylaxis 
(section 7.2). 

Contraindications: hypotension, bradycardia, second- and third-degree 
atrioventricular block, sinoatrial block, sick sinus syndrome; cardiogenic 
shock; history of heart failure or significantly impaired left ventricular 
function (even if controlled by therapy); atrial flutter or fibrillation 
complicating Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome; porphyria. 

Precautions: first-degree atrioventricular block; acute phase of myocardial 
infarction (avoid if bradycardia, hypotension, or left ventricular failure); 
hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); children (specialist advice only); 

274 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid grapefruit 
juice (may affect metabolism); interactions: Appendix 1. 

VERAPAMIL AND BETA-BLOCKERS. Both verapamil and beta-blockers have 
cardiodepressant activity, and their use together may lead to bradycardia, heart block, 
and left ventricular failure, particularly in patients with myocardial insufficiency. 
Treatment with beta-blockers should be discontinued at least 24 hours before 
intravenous administration of verapamil. 
Dose:  
Supraventricular arrhythmias, by mouth, ADULT, 40–120 mg 3 times daily. 
Supraventricular arrhythmias, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 5–10 mg over 
2 minutes, preferably with ECG monitoring; ELDERLY, 5–10 mg over 
3 minutes; in paroxysmal tachyarrhythmias, a further 5 mg may be given 
after 5–10 minutes if required. 

Adverse effects: constipation; less commonly nausea, vomiting, flushing, 
headache, dizziness, fatigue, and ankle oedema; rarely allergic reactions 
including pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, and Erythema multiforme 
(Stevens-Johnson syndrome); myalgia, arthralgia, paraesthesia, 
erythromelalgia; increased prolactin concentration; gynaecomastia and 
gingival hyperplasia on long-term treatment; hypotension, heart failure, 
bradycardia, heart block, and asystole (due to negative inotropic effect) with 
high doses. 

12.3 Antihypertensive medicines 

Management of hypertension 
Treatment of hypertension should be integrated into a programme to manage 
all factors that increase the risk of cardiovascular events (such as stroke and 
myocardial infarction); the overall risk of cardiovascular disease should be 
assessed for all patients with hypertension. Treatment is often life-long. 
Hypertension was formerly classified as mild, moderate or severe, but a 
grading system is now preferred. Grade 1 hypertension is defined as  
140–159 mmHg systolic blood pressure and 90–99 mmHg diastolic blood 
pressure; Grade 2 hypertension, 160–179 mmHg systolic and 100–109 mmHg 
diastolic and Grade 3 hypertension, more than 180 mmHg systolic and more 
than 110 mmHg diastolic. The aim of treatment in most patients is an optimal 
target systolic blood pressure of less than 140 mmHg and a diastolic blood 
pressure of less than 85 mmHg. For patients with diabetes, the aim is a systolic 
blood pressure of less than 130 mmHg and a diastolic blood pressure of less 
than 80 mmHg. In some patients these targets are not possible despite 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 275 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

adequate treatment; however, any decrease in blood pressure reduces the risk 
of cardiovascular disease. 
Lifestyle changes should be introduced for all patients; they include weight 
reduction, reduction in alcohol intake, reduction of dietary sodium, stopping 
tobacco smoking, and reduction in saturated fat intake. The patient should eat 
a healthy nutritious diet including adequate fruit and vegetables and should 
exercise regularly. These measures alone may be sufficient in mild 
hypertension, but patients with moderate to severe hypertension will also 
require specific antihypertensive therapy. 

Drug treatment of hypertension 
There are no significant differences between the major groups of 
antihypertensive drugs in terms of efficacy, side-effects, and quality of life 
although some differences in response are seen which are related to age or 
ethnic group. Therefore, antihypertensive treatment should be selected 
according to the individual's clinical needs, any conditions that render certain 
drugs less suitable for the individual, and the availability and cost of drugs. 
In the absence of compelling indications for another class of drug, thiazide 
diuretics, such as hydrochlorothiazide (see also section 16), should usually be 
considered for antihypertensive therapy; they are particularly indicated in the 
elderly. They have few adverse effects in low doses, but in large doses they 
may cause a variety of unwanted metabolic effects (principally potassium 
depletion), reduced glucose tolerance, ventricular ectopic beats and impotence; 
they should be avoided in gout. These effects can be reduced by keeping the 
dose as low as possible; higher doses do not produce an increased reduction in 
blood pressure. Thiazides are inexpensive and, when used in combination, can 
enhance the effectiveness of many other classes of antihypertensive drug. 
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (beta-blockers) such as atenolol are effective in 
all grades of hypertension, and are particularly useful in angina and following 
myocardial infarction (see section 12.1); they should be avoided in asthma, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and heart block. Beta-blockers, 
especially in combination with a thiazide, are best avoided in patients with 
diabetes or those at high risk of developing diabetes. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhibitors) such as enalapril 
are effective and well tolerated by most patients. They can be used in heart 
failure (see section 12.4), left ventricular dysfunction, and diabetic nephropathy, 
but should be avoided in renovascular disease and in pregnancy. The most 
common adverse effect is a dry persistent cough. 
Dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers such as amlodipine are useful for 
isolated systolic hypertension, in populations unresponsive to other 
antihypertensives (for example, Africans). 

276 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Drugs acting on the central nervous system are also effective antihypertensive 
drugs. In particular, methyldopa is effective in the treatment of hypertension 
in pregnancy. 
A single antihypertensive drug is often not adequate and other 
antihypertensive drugs are usually added in a stepwise manner until blood 
pressure is controlled. 

Hypertensive emergencies 
In situations where immediate reduction of blood pressure is essential and 
treatment by mouth is not possible, intravenous infusion of sodium 
nitroprusside is effective. However, over-rapid reduction in blood pressure is 
hazardous and can lead to reduced organ perfusion and cerebral infarction. 
PREGNANCY. In pregnancy, hypertension is defined as a sustained diastolic blood 
pressure of 90 mmHg or more. Drug therapy for chronic hypertension during 
pregnancy remains controversial. If diastolic blood pressure is greater than 95 mmHg, 
methyldopa is the safest drug. Beta-blockers should be used with caution in pregnancy, 
since they can restrict fetal growth if used for an extended period; intrauterine growth 
restriction is minimized if use is limited to the third trimester. ACE inhibitors are 
contraindicated in pregnancy since they may damage fetal and neonatal blood pressure 
control and renal function. Women who are taking these drugs and become pregnant 
should have their antihypertensive therapy changed immediately. 

PRE-ECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA. If pre-eclampsia or severe hypertension 
occurs after week 36 of pregnancy, delivery is the treatment of choice. For acute severe 
hypertension in pre-eclampsia or eclampsia, intravenous hydralazine can be used. 
Magnesium sulfate (section 5) is the treatment of choice to prevent eclamptic 
convulsions in eclampsia and severe pre-eclampsia. 

Amlodipine 
Tablet: 5 mg. 

Amlodipine is a representative dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker. Various drugs 
can serve as alternatives. 

NOTE. Tablets from different suppliers may contain different salts (e.g. amlodipine 
besilate, amlodipine maleate, amlodipine mesilate) but the strength is expressed in terms 
of amlodipine (base); tablets containing different salts are considered interchangeable. 

Uses: hypertension, angina (see also section 12.1). 
Contraindications: cardiogenic shock, unstable angina, significant aortic 
stenosis. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy (Appendix 2); and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 277 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Dose:  
Angina, by mouth, ADULT, initially 5 mg once daily, increased if necessary; 
maximum, 10 mg once daily. 

Hypertension, by mouth, ADULT, initially 5 mg once daily, increased if necessary; 
maximum 10 mg once daily. 

Adverse effects: abdominal pain, nausea; palpitation, flushing, oedema; 
headache, dizziness, sleep disturbances, fatigue; less commonly 
gastrointestinal disturbances, dry mouth, taste disturbances, hypotension, 
syncope, chest pain, dyspnoea, rhinitis, mood changes, tremor, paraesthesia, 
increased sweating, urinary disturbances, impotence, gynaecomastia, weight 
changes, myalgia, arthralgia, muscle cramps, visual disturbances, tinnitus, 
pruritus, rash (including isolated reports of erythema multiforme), alopecia, 
purpura, and skin discoloration; very rarely gastritis, pancreatitis, hepatitis, 
jaundice, cholestasis, gingival hyperplasia, myocardial infarction, 
arrhythmias, vasculitis, coughing, hyperglycaemia, thrombocytopenia, 
peripheral neuropathy, angioedema, and urticaria. 

Atenolol 
Tablet: 50 mg; 100 mg. 

Atenolol is a representative beta-adrenoceptor antagonist (beta-blocker). Various drugs 
can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: hypertension; angina (section 12.1); arrhythmias (section 12.2); migraine 
prophylaxis (section 7.2). 

Contraindications: history of asthma or bronchospasm (unless no alternative, 
in which case, use with extreme caution and under specialist supervision); 
uncontrolled heart failure, Prinzmetal angina, marked bradycardia, 
hypotension, sick sinus syndrome, second- or third-degree atrioventricular 
block, cardiogenic shock; metabolic acidosis; severe peripheral arterial 
disease; phaeochromocytoma (unless used with an alpha-blocker). 

Precautions: avoid abrupt withdrawal especially in ischaemic heart disease; 
history of obstructive airway disease (use with caution and monitor lung 
function; see also Contraindications above); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); first-degree atrioventricular block; portal 
hypertension (liver function deteriorates); reduce dose in renal impairment 
(reduce dose; Appendix 4); diabetes mellitus (small decrease in glucose 
tolerance, masking of symptoms of hypoglycaemia); history of 
hypersensitivity [increased reaction to allergens, also reduced response to 
epinephrine (adrenaline)]; myasthenia gravis; interactions: Appendix 1. 

278 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Dose:  
Hypertension, by mouth, ADULT, 50 mg once daily (higher doses rarely 
necessary). 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances including nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, constipation, and abdominal cramp; fatigue; cold hands and feet; 
exacerbation of intermittent claudication and Raynaud phenomenon; 
bronchospasm; bradycardia, heart failure, conduction disorders, 
hypotension; sleep disturbances including nightmares; depression, 
confusion; hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia; exacerbation of psoriasis; rash, 
dry eyes, and oculomucocutaneous syndrome (reversible on withdrawal) 
rarely reported. 

Enalapril 
Tablet: 2.5 mg. 

Enalapril is a representative angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: hypertension; heart failure (section 12.4). 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to ACE inhibitors (including angioedema); 
renovascular disease; pregnancy (Appendix 2). 

Precautions: concomitant use of diuretics (see note below); hypotension with 
first doses, especially in patients on diuretics, on a low-sodium diet, on 
dialysis, if dehydrated, or with heart failure; peripheral vascular disease or 
generalized atherosclerosis (risk of clinically silent renovascular disease); 
severe or symptomatic aortic stenosis (use with great care); monitor renal 
function before and during treatment; renal impairment (reduce dose; see 
also Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); possibly increased risk 
of agranulocytosis in collagen vascular disease; history of idiopathic or 
hereditary angioedema (use with care or avoid); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

USE WITH DIURETICS. Because of the risk of very rapid falls in blood pressure in 
volume-depleted patients; treatment should be initiated with very low doses. High-dose 
diuretic therapy (for example, with furosemide at doses greater than 80 mg daily) 
should be discontinued, or the dose significantly reduced, at least 24 hours before 
starting enalapril (may not be possible in heart failure due to the risk of pulmonary 
oedema). If high-dose diuretic therapy cannot be stopped, medical supervision is 
advised for at least 2 hours after administration or until blood pressure is stable. 

ANAPHYLACTOID REACTIONS. Avoid enalapril during dialysis with high-flux 
polyacrilonitrile membranes and during low-density lipoprotein apheresis with dextran 
sulfate; also withhold before desensitization with wasp or bee venom. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 279 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Dose:  

Hypertension by mouth, ADULT, initially 5 mg once daily (lower if used in 
addition to a diuretic or in renal impairment); increased if necessary; usual 
maintenance dose, 20 mg once daily; maximum, 40 mg once daily. 

Adverse effects: dizziness, headache; less commonly, nausea, diarrhoea, 
hypotension (severe in rare cases), dry cough, fatigue, asthenia, muscle 
cramps, rash, and renal impairment; rarely vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal 
pain, constipation, peptic ulcer, glossitis, stomatitis, ileus, anorexia, 
pancreatitis, liver damage, chest pain, palpitations, arrhythmias, Raynaud 
syndrome, angioedema, bronchospasm, rhinorrhoea, dry mouth, sore throat, 
pulmonary infiltrates, paraesthesia, vertigo, nervousness, depression, 
confusion, drowsiness, insomnia, dream abnormalities, pruritus, urticaria, 
alopecia, flushing, impotence, gynaecomastia, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
toxic epidermal necrolysis, exfoliative dermatitis, pemphigus, taste 
disturbances, tinnitus, and blurred vision; electrolyte disturbances and 
hypersensitivity-like reactions (including fever, myalgia, arthralgia, 
eosinophilia, and photosensitivity) also reported. 

Hydralazine 
Powder for injection: 20 mg (hydrochloride) in ampoule. 
Tablet: 25 mg; 50 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: in combination therapy in moderate to severe hypertension, 
hypertensive crises; hypertension associated with pregnancy (including pre-
eclampsia or eclampsia); heart failure (section 12.4). 

Contraindications: idiopathic systemic lupus erythematosus, severe tachycardia, 
high output heart failure, myocardial insufficiency due to mechanical 
obstruction, cor pulmonale, dissecting aortic aneurysm, porphyria. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (reduce dose; 
Appendix 4); coronary artery disease (may provoke angina; avoid after 
myocardial infarction until stabilized); cerebrovascular disease; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); occasionally over-rapid blood 
pressure reduction even with low parenteral doses; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Hypertension, by mouth, ADULT, 25 mg twice daily, increased if necessary to 
maximum, 50 mg twice daily. 

Hypertensive crisis (including during pregnancy), by slow intravenous injection, 
ADULT, 5–10 mg diluted with 10 ml sodium chloride, 0.9%; if necessary 
may be repeated after 20–30 minutes (see also Precautions). 

280 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Hypertensive crisis (including during pregnancy), by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 
initially 200–300 micrograms/minute; usual maintenance dose  
50–150 micrograms/minute. 

Hypertensive crisis (including during pregnancy), by intramuscular injection, 
ADULT, 12.5 mg every 2 hours, repeated as necessary. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: tachycardia, palpitations, postural hypotension; fluid retention; 
gastrointestinal disturbances including anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, 
and rarely constipation; dizziness, flushing, headache; abnormal liver 
function, jaundice; systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, particularly 
in women and slow acetylators; nasal congestion, agitation, anxiety, 
polyneuritis, peripheral neuritis, rash, fever, paraesthesia, arthralgia, myalgia, 
increased lacrimation, dyspnoea; raised plasma creatinine, proteinuria, 
haematuria; blood disorders including haemolytic anaemia, leukopenia, and 
thrombocytopenia. 

Hydrochlorothiazide 
Tablet (scored): 25 mg. 

Hydrochlorothiazide is a representative thiazide diuretic. Various medicines can serve 
as alternatives. 

Uses: alone in mild hypertension, and in combination with other drugs in 
moderate to severe hypertension; heart failure (section 12.4); oedema 
(section 16). 

Contraindications: severe renal or severe hepatic impairment; hyponatraemia, 
hypercalcaemia, refractory hypokalaemia, symptomatic hyperuricaemia; 
Addison disease. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the elderly; 
electrolytes may need to be monitored with high doses or in renal 
impairment; may aggravate diabetes mellitus and gout; may exacerbate 
systemic lupus erythematosus; porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Hypertension, by mouth, ADULT, 12.5 mg daily, increased to 25–50 mg daily if 
necessary. 

Adverse effects: fluid and electrolyte imbalance leading to dry mouth, thirst, 
gastrointestinal disturbances (including nausea, and vomiting), weakness, 
lethargy, drowsiness, seizures, headache, muscle pains or cramps, 
hypotension (including postural hypotension), oliguria, and arrhythmias; 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 281 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hyponatraemia, hypochloraemic alkalosis, 
hypercalcaemia; hyperglycaemia, hyperuricaemia, gout; rash, 
photosensitivity; altered plasma lipid concentration; rarely impotence 
(reversible); blood disorders (including neutropenia, thrombocytopenia); 
pancreatitis, intrahepatic cholestasis; acute renal failure; hypersensitivity 
reactions including pneumonitis, pulmonary oedema, and severe skin 
reactions. 

Methyldopa 
Tablet: 250 mg. 

Uses: hypertension in pregnancy. 
Contraindications: depression; active liver disease; phaeochromocytoma, 
porphyria. 

Precautions: history of hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); blood counts and liver-function tests advised; history of 
depression; positive direct Coomb test in up to 20% of patients (affects 
blood cross-matching); interference with laboratory tests; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  

Hypertension in pregnancy, by mouth, ADULT, initially 250 mg 2–3 times daily; 
gradually increased at intervals of 2 or more days, if necessary; maximum, 
3 g daily. 

Adverse effects: sedation, dizziness, lightheadedness, postural hypotension, 
weakness, fatigue, headache, fluid retention and oedema, sexual dysfunction; 
impaired concentration and memory, depression, mild psychosis, disturbed 
sleep and nightmares; drug fever, influenza-like syndrome; nausea, vomiting, 
constipation, diarrhoea, dry mouth, stomatitis, sialadenitis; liver function 
impairment, hepatitis, jaundice, rarely fatal hepatic necrosis; bone marrow 
depression, haemolytic anaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
eosinophilia; parkinsonism; rash including toxic epidermal necrolysis; nasal 
congestion; black or sore tongue; bradycardia, exacerbation of angina; 
myalgia, arthralgia, paraesthesia, Bell palsy; pancreatitis; hypersensitivity 
reactions including lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, myocarditis, 
pericarditis; gynaecomastia, hyperprolactinaemia, amenorrhoea; urine 
darkens on standing. 

 

282 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Sodium nitroprusside 
Powder for infusion: 50 mg in ampoule. 

Sodium nitroprusside is a complementary list medicine for the treatment of 
hypertensive crisis.   

Uses: hypertensive crisis (when treatment by mouth is not possible). 
Contraindications: severe hepatic impairment; compensatory hypertension; 
severe vitamin B12 deficiency; Leber optic atrophy. 

Precautions: impaired pulmonary function; hypothyroidism; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); ischaemic heart disease, impaired cerebral circulation; 
hyponatraemia; raised intracranial pressure; the elderly; hypothermia; 
monitor blood pressure and blood cyanide concentration; monitor blood 
thiocyanate concentration if given for more than 3 days; avoid sudden 
withdrawal (reduce infusion over 15–30 minutes to avoid rebound effects); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1.  

Dose: 
Hypertensive crisis, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, initially  
0.3–1.5 micrograms/kg/minute, increased gradually to  
0.5–6 micrograms/kg/minute; (lower doses in patients already being treated 
with antihypertensives); maximum, 8 micrograms/kg/minute; stop infusion 
if response is unsatisfactory after 10 minutes at the maximum dose.   

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions.   

Adverse effects: severe hypotension; adverse effects associated with over-rapid 
reduction in blood pressure include headache, dizziness; retching, 
abdominal pain; perspiration; palpitations, apprehension, retrosternal 
discomfort; rarely reduced platelet count, and acute transient phlebitis; 
adverse effects associated with excessive concentrations of cyanide 
metabolite include tachycardia, sweating, hyperventilation, arrhythmias, and 
marked metabolic acidosis (discontinue infusion and give sodium nitrite 
followed by sodium thiosulfate (see section 4.2). 

12.4 Medicines used in heart failure 

Treatment of heart failure aims to relieve symptoms, improve exercise 
tolerance, reduce incidence of acute exacerbations, and reduce mortality. 
Drugs used to treat heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction 
include ACE inhibitors, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, and vasodilators. In 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 283 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

addition, measures such as weight reduction, moderate salt restriction, and 
appropriate exercise should be introduced. 
The primary treatment of heart failure is with angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors (ACE inhibitors) such as enalapril which can be used in all stages of 
chronic heart failure to prevent further deterioration and progression of heart 
disease. 
A thiazide diuretic such as hydrochlorothiazide (section 16) is used in the 
management of mild to moderate heart failure when the patient has mild fluid 
retention and severe pulmonary oedema is not present; however, thiazides are 
ineffective if renal function is poor. In these patients, and in more severe fluid 
retention, a loop diuretic such as furosemide (section 16) is required. In severe 
fluid retention, intravenous furosemide produces relief of breathlessness and 
reduces preload sooner than would be expected from the time of onset of 
diuresis. Hypokalaemia may develop, but this is less likely with the shorter-
acting loop diuretics than with the thiazides; however, care is needed to avoid 
hypotension. 
A combination of a thiazide and a loop diuretic may be required to treat 
refractory oedema. The combination often produces a synergistic effect on 
solute and water excretion, which relieves symptoms in the diuretic-resistant 
heart failure patient. However, the combination may produce excessive 
intravascular volume depletion and electrolyte disturbances including 
potentially life-threatening hypokalaemia. 
The aldosterone antagonist spironolactone (section 16) may be considered for 
patients with severe heart failure who are already receiving an ACE inhibitor 
and a diuretic; a low dose of spironolactone (usually 25 mg daily) reduces 
symptoms and mortality rate in these patients. Close monitoring of serum 
creatinine and potassium is necessary with any change in treatment or in the 
patient's clinical condition. 
The beta-blockers, bisoprolol and carvedilol [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List], can be used in stable heart failure and left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction. Treatment with beta-blockers should only be undertaken by those 
experienced in the management of heart failure. 
Digoxin, a cardiac glycoside, increases the strength of cardiac muscle 
contractions and increases cardiac output. In mild heart failure, digoxin 
inhibits the sympathetic nervous system and produces arterial vasodilation. It 
produces symptomatic improvement, increases exercise tolerance, and reduces 
the need for hospitalization, but it does not reduce mortality. It is considered 
for patients with atrial fibrillation (see also section 12.2) and for selected 
patients who remain symptomatic despite treatment with an ACE inhibitor, a 
diuretic, and a suitable beta-blocker. 

284 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Vasodilators are used in heart failure to reduce systemic vascular resistance. 
Isosorbide dinitrate (section 12.1) produces mainly venous dilatation, which 
reduces left ventricular preload, leading to a reduction in pulmonary 
congestion and dyspnoea. Hydralazine (section 12.3) produces mainly arterial 
vasodilation, which reduces left ventricular afterload, and increases stroke 
volume and cardiac output. Isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine can be used in 
combination when an ACE inhibitor cannot be used, but this combination 
may be poorly tolerated. 
Dopamine, an inotropic sympathomimetic, may be given for short periods in 
the treatment of severe heart failure. Dosage is critical; at low doses it 
stimulates myocardial contractility and increases cardiac output; however, 
higher doses (more than 5 micrograms/kg per minute) cause vasoconstriction, 
with a worsening of heart failure. 

Digoxin 
Injection: 250 micrograms/ml in 2-ml ampoule.  
Oral liquid: 50 micrograms/ml.  
Tablet: 62.5 micrograms; 250 micrograms. 

Uses: heart failure; supraventricular arrhythmias (section 12.2). 
Contraindications: hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (unless also 
severe heart failure); Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome or other accessory 
pathway, particularly if accompanied by atrial fibrillation; ventricular 
tachycardia or fibrillation; intermittent complete heart block; second-degree 
atrioventricular block. 

Precautions: recent myocardial infarction; sick sinus syndrome; severe 
pulmonary disease; thyroid disease; the elderly (reduce dose); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); avoid hypokalaemia; avoid rapid intravenous 
administration (nausea and increased risk of arrhythmias); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Heart failure, by mouth, ADULT, initially 1–1.5 mg in divided doses over 
24 hours for rapid digitalization (or 250 micrograms once or twice daily if 
digitalization less urgent); followed by 62.5–500 micrograms daily (higher 
dose may be divided), according to renal function and heart rate response; 
usual maintenance dose, 125–250 micrograms daily (lower dose more 
appropriate in the elderly). 

Heart failure, emergency loading dose, by intravenous infusion over at least 
2 hours, ADULT, 0.75–1 mg. 

NOTE. Infusion dose may need to be reduced if digoxin or other cardiac glycoside has 
been given in previous 2 weeks. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 285 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Adverse effects: usually only associated with high doses; gastrointestinal 
disturbances including anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal 
pain; visual disturbances, headache, fatigue, drowsiness, confusion, 
dizziness, delirium, hallucinations, depression; arrhythmias, heart block; 
rarely rash, and intestinal ischaemia; gynaecomastia on long-term use; 
thrombocytopenia reported. 

Dopamine 
Injection: 40 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 5-ml vial. 

Dopamine is a complementary list medicine for inotropic support. 

Uses: cardiogenic shock including in myocardial infarction and cardiac surgery. 
Contraindications: tachyarrhythmia, ventricular fibrillation; ischaemic heart 
disease; phaeochromocytoma; hyperthyroidism. 

Precautions: correct hypovolaemia before, and maintain blood volume during 
the treatment; correct hypoxia, hypercapnia, and metabolic acidosis before 
or at same time as starting treatment; use low dose in cardiogenic shock due 
to myocardial infarction; history of peripheral vascular disease (increased 
risk of ischaemia of extremities); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the elderly; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Cardiogenic shock, by intravenous infusion into a large vein, ADULT,  
initially 2–5 micrograms/kg/minute, gradually increased by  
5–10 micrograms/kg/minute according to blood pressure, cardiac output, 
and urine output (seriously ill patients, up to 20–50 micrograms/kg/minute). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting; peripheral vasoconstriction; 
hypotension with dizziness, fainting, flushing; tachycardia, ectopic beats, 
palpitations, anginal pain; headache, dyspnoea; hypertension particularly in 
overdosage. 

Enalapril 
Tablet: 2.5 mg. 

Enalapril is a representative angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: heart failure (with a diuretic); prevention of symptomatic heart failure in 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction; hypertension (section 12.3). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to ACE inhibitors (including angioedema); 
renovascular disease; pregnancy (Appendix 2). 

286 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Precautions: concomitant use of diuretics (see note below); hypotension with 
first doses, especially in patients on diuretics, on a low-sodium diet, on 
dialysis, if dehydrated, or with heart failure; peripheral vascular disease or 
generalized atherosclerosis (risk of clinically silent renovascular disease); 
severe or symptomatic aortic stenosis (use with great care); monitor renal 
function before and during treatment; renal impairment (reduce dose; see 
also Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); possibly increased risk 
of agranulocytosis in collagen vascular disease; history of idiopathic or 
hereditary angioedema (use with care or avoid); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

USE WITH DIURETICS. Because of the risk of very rapid falls in blood pressure in 
volume-depleted patients; treatment should be initiated with very low doses. High-dose 
diuretic therapy (for example, with furosemide at doses greater than 80 mg daily) 
should be discontinued, or the dose significantly reduced, at least 24 hours before 
starting enalapril (may not be possible in heart failure due to the risk of pulmonary 
oedema). If high-dose diuretic therapy cannot be stopped, medical supervision is 
advised for at least 2 hours after administration or until blood pressure is stable. 

ANAPHYLACTOID REACTIONS. Avoid enalapril during dialysis with high-flux 
polyacrilonitrile membranes and during low-density lipoprotein apheresis with dextran 
sulfate; also withhold before desensitization with wasp or bee venom. 
Dose:  
Heart failure, asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction, by mouth, ADULT, 
initially 2.5 mg daily under close medical supervision, increased over  
2–4 weeks to usual maintenance dose of 20 mg daily, either as a single dose 
or in 2 divided doses; maximum, 40 mg daily. 

Adverse effects: dizziness, headache; less commonly, nausea, diarrhoea, 
hypotension (severe in rare cases), dry cough, fatigue, asthenia, muscle 
cramps, rash, and renal impairment; rarely vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal 
pain, constipation, peptic ulcer, glossitis, stomatitis, ileus, anorexia, 
pancreatitis, liver damage, chest pain, palpitations, arrhythmias, Raynaud 
syndrome, angioedema, bronchospasm, rhinorrhoea, dry mouth, sore throat, 
pulmonary infiltrates, paraesthesia, vertigo, nervousness, depression, 
confusion, drowsiness, insomnia, dream abnormalities, pruritus, urticaria, 
alopecia, flushing, impotence, gynaecomastia, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
toxic epidermal necrolysis, exfoliative dermatitis, pemphigus, taste 
disturbances, tinnitus, and blurred vision; electrolyte disturbances and 
hypersensitivity-like reactions (including fever, myalgia, arthralgia, 
eosinophilia, and photosensitivity) also reported. 

 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 287 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Furosemide 
Injection: 10 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 40 mg. 

See Section 16.  

Hydrochlorothiazide 
Tablet (scored): 25 mg. 

Hydrochlorothiazide is a representative thiazide diuretic. Various medicines can serve 
as alternatives. 

Uses: heart failure; hypertension (section 12.3); oedema (section 16). 
Contraindications: severe renal or severe hepatic impairment; hyponatraemia, 
hypercalcaemia, refractory hypokalaemia, symptomatic hyperuricaemia; 
Addison disease. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the elderly (reduce 
dose); electrolytes may need to be monitored with high doses or in renal 
impairment; may aggravate diabetes mellitus and gout; may exacerbate 
systemic lupus erythematosus; porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Heart failure, by mouth, ADULT, initially 25 mg daily on rising (reduce to 12.5 mg 
daily in the ELDERLY), increased to 50 mg daily, if necessary. 

Adverse effects: fluid and electrolyte imbalance leading to dry mouth, thirst, 
gastrointestinal disturbances (including nausea, and vomiting), weakness, 
lethargy, drowsiness, seizures, headache, muscle pains or cramps, 
hypotension (including postural hypotension), oliguria, and arrhythmias; 
hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hyponatraemia, hypochloraemic alkalosis, 
hypercalcaemia; hyperglycaemia, hyperuricaemia, gout; rash, 
photosensitivity; altered plasma lipid concentration; rarely impotence 
(reversible); blood disorders including neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia; 
pancreatitis, intrahepatic cholestasis; acute renal failure; hypersensitivity 
reactions including pneumonitis, pulmonary oedema, and severe skin 
reactions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

288 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

12.5 Antithrombotic medicines 

Anticoagulants such as heparin sodium and warfarin prevent thrombus 
formation or the extension of an existing thrombus. For further details, see 
section 10.2 (Medicines affecting coagulation). Antiplatelet drugs such as 
acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) also help to inhibit thrombus formation by 
decreasing platelet aggregation. 
Thrombolytics (fibrinolytics) such as streptokinase are used to break up 
thrombi; they are used to treat acute myocardial infarction, extensive deep vein 
thrombosis, major pulmonary embolism, and acute arterial occlusion. 

Myocardial infarction 
Management of myocardial infarction comprises two phases: 
1. initial management of the acute attack;  
2. long-term management, including prevention of further attacks. 

Initial management 

Oxygen (section 1.1) should be given to all patients, except those with severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Pain and anxiety are relieved by slow intravenous injection of an opioid 
analgesic such as morphine (section 2.2). Metoclopramide (section 17.2) may 
also be given by intramuscular injection to prevent and treat nausea and 
vomiting caused by morphine. 
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) 150–300 mg by mouth (preferably chewed or 
dispersed in water) is given immediately for its antiplatelet effect. 
Thrombolytic drugs such as streptokinase help to restore perfusion and thus 
relieve myocardial ischaemia; they should ideally be given within 1 hour of 
infarction (use after 12 hours requires specialist advice). Antibodies to 
streptokinase appear 4 days after use and streptokinase should not be given to 
the patient again after this time. 
Nitrates (section 12.1) may also be given to relieve ischaemic pain. 
Early administration of a beta-blocker such as atenolol (section 12.1) has been 
shown to reduce both early mortality and the recurrence rate of myocardial 
infarction; initial intravenous administration is followed by long-term oral 
treatment (unless the patient has contraindications). 
ACE inhibitors such as enalapril (section 12.4) have also been shown to be 
beneficial in initial management (unless patient has contraindications), when 
given within 24 hours, and if possible continued for at least 5–6 weeks.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 289 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

If arrhythmias occur, they should be treated aggressively (see section 12.2), but 
the likelihood of arrhythmia decreases rapidly over the first 24 hours after 
infarction. Ventricular fibrillation should be treated immediately with a 
defibrillator; if this alone is ineffective, the antiarrhythmic drug lidocaine 
(section 12.2) should be given. 
All patients should be closely monitored for hyperglycaemia; those with 
diabetes mellitus or raised blood glucose concentration should receive insulin 
(see section 18.5). 

Long-term management 

Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) should be given to all patients unless it is 
contraindicated. The prolonged antiplatelet effect has been shown to reduce 
the rate of reinfarction. 
Treatment with beta-blockers should be continued for at least 2–3 years. 
Verapamil is sometimes useful if a beta-blocker cannot be used (see 
section 12.1). 
ACE inhibitors such as enalapril (section 12.4) should also be used since they 
reduce mortality, particularly in patients with left ventricular dysfunction. 
Nitrates (section 12.1) may be required for patients with angina. 
The use of statins (section 12.6) may also be considered in patients with high 
risk of recurrence. 

Stroke 
Stroke (cerebrovascular accident) may be ischaemic or haemorrhagic; precise 
diagnosis is essential, as management for the two types of stroke is quite 
different. 
Primary prevention of both types of stroke includes management of high 
blood pressure, stopping smoking, weight reduction, and cholesterol reduction. 
Atrial fibrillation, acute myocardial infarction, and valvular disease may 
produce embolism and ischaemic stroke. Prophylaxis in patients at risk of 
ischaemic stroke includes antiplatelet drugs such as acetylsalicylic acid or oral 
anticoagulants such as warfarin (section 10.2). Treatment of acute ischaemic 
stroke includes use of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) given within 48 hours of 
onset, and, in selected patients, anticoagulants such as heparin sodium 
(section 10.2). Long-term therapy with acetylsalicylic acid reduces the risk of 
having another stroke. 
Antiplatelet drugs are not used in the management of haemorrhagic stroke, 
because they can exacerbate bleeding. Treatments include careful lowering of 
very high blood pressure (see section 12.3) and surgery where appropriate. 

290 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Acetylsalicylic acid is normally given for at least one year after coronary artery 
bypass surgery. It is also given to patients with prosthetic heart valves who 
have had cerebral embolism despite warfarin treatment. 

Acetylsalicylic acid 
Tablet: 100 mg. 

Uses: acute myocardial infarction, acute ischaemic stroke, prophylaxis of 
cerebrovascular disease or myocardial infarction; pyrexia, pain, 
inflammation (section 2.1); migraine (section 7.1). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity (including asthma, angioedema, urticaria, or 
rhinitis) to acetylsalicylic acid or any other NSAIM; children and 
adolescents under 16 years (risk of Reye syndrome; see section 2.1); active 
peptic ulceration; haemophilia and other bleeding disorders. 

Precautions: asthma; uncontrolled hypertension; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); see also section 2.1; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Prophylaxis of cerebrovascular disease or myocardial infarction, by mouth, 

ADULT, 75–100 mg daily. 
Treatment of acute myocardial infarction, acute ischaemic stroke, by mouth, 

ADULT, 150–300 mg. 
Adverse effects: bronchospasm; gastrointestinal haemorrhage (rarely major), 
also other haemorrhage (for example, subconjunctival); see also section 2.1. 

Streptokinase 
Powder for injection: 1.5 million IU in vial. 

Streptokinase is a complementary drug; it is used in the management of myocardial 
infarction and thromboembolism. 

Uses: life-threatening deep-vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, acute 
arterial thromboembolism; acute myocardial infarction. 

Contraindications: repeat use of streptokinase beyond 4 days of first 
administration; recent haemorrhage, surgery (including dental), parturition, 
trauma; heavy vaginal bleeding; haemorrhagic stroke, history of 
cerebrovascular disease (especially recent or if residual disability); coma; 
severe hypertension; coagulation defects; bleeding diatheses, aortic 
dissection; risk of gastrointestinal bleeding (such as recent history of peptic 
ulcer, oesophageal varices, or ulcerative colitis); acute pancreatitis; severe 
liver disease; acute pulmonary disease with cavitation; previous allergic 
reactions. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 291 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Precautions: risk of bleeding from any invasive procedure (including injection); 
external chest compression; pregnancy (Appendix 2); abdominal aneurysm 
or where thrombolysis may give rise to embolic complications such as 
enlarged left atrium with atrial fibrillation (risk of dissolution of clot and 
subsequent embolization); diabetic retinopathy (small risk of retinal 
haemorrhage); recent or concurrent anticoagulant treatment. 

Dose:  
Acute myocardial infarction (preferably within 1 hour of infarction), 
by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 1 500 000 IU over 60 minutes. 

Thrombosis, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 250 000 IU over 30 minutes, 
followed by 100 000 IU every hour for 12–72 hours, according to condition 
with monitoring of clotting parameters. 

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting; bleeding, usually limited to site of 
injection but internal bleeding including intracranial haemorrhage may 
occur (if serious bleeding occurs, discontinue infusion; coagulation factors 
may be required); hypotension, arrhythmias (particularly in myocardial 
infarction); allergic reactions including rash, flushing, uveitis, and 
anaphylaxis; fever, chills, back or abdominal pain; Guillain-Barré syndrome 
reported rarely. 

12.6 Lipid-lowering agents 

The primary aim of therapy is to reduce progression of atherosclerosis and to 
improve survival in patients with established cardiovascular disease, to reduce 
premature cardiac morbidity and mortality in people at high risk of 
cardiovascular events, and to prevent pancreatitis due to hypertriglyceridaemia. 
Beta-hydroxy-beta-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG Co A) reductase 
inhibitors, often referred to as “statins”, are potent and effective lipid-lowering 
drugs with a good tolerability profile. Simvastatin is a representative example 
of this class of drugs; others include pravastatin, lovastatin, fluvastatin, and 
atorvastatin [not included on the 15th WHO Model List]. Statins have been 
shown to reduce the incidence of fatal and non-fatal myocardial infarction, 
stroke and mortality (all causes), as well as the need for coronary bypass 
surgery. They are recommended for primary and secondary prevention of 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in high-risk patients. 
 
 
 

292 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



12. Cardiovascular medicines 

Simvastatin 
Tablet: 5 mg; 10 mg; 20 mg; 40 mg. 

Simvastatin is a representative statin. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with high cardiovascular 
risk due to atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or diabetes mellitus. 

Contraindications: active liver disease (or persistently abnormal liver function 
tests); porphyria; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3) 

Precautions: history of liver disease or a high alcohol intake (use should be 
avoided in active liver disease; Appendix 5); monitor liver function at 
initiation of treatment, at 12 weeks after (or if dose increased), and at  
6-month intervals thereafter (discontinue if serum transaminase 
concentration rises to, and persists at, 3 times the upper limit of the 
reference range); hypothyroidism (see Muscle effects below); increased risk 
of myopathy or rhabdomyolysis (patients should be advised to report 
unexplained muscle pain; see Muscle effects below); renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); avoid grapefruit juice; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Prevention of cardiovascular events, by mouth, ADULT, initially 20–40 mg once 
daily at night, adjusted at intervals of at least 4 weeks (maximum, 80 mg 
once daily at night). 

NOTE. Maximum simvastatin dose with concomitant ciclosporin, danazol, fibrate or 
lipid-lowering dose of nicotinic acid, 10 mg daily; with concomitant amiodarone or 
verapamil, 20 mg daily; with concomitant diltiazem, 40 mg daily. 

MUSCLE EFFECTS. Discontinue simvastatin if myopathy is suspected and creatine 
kinase is elevated (more than 5 times upper limit of normal), or if severe muscular 
symptoms are present. Simvastatin should not be started if creatine kinase is elevated in 
patients at high risk of muscle effects. There is an increased risk of myopathy if 
simvastatin is given at high dosage or with a fibrate, with lipid-lowering doses of 
nicotinic acid, or with immunosuppressants such as ciclosporin (monitor liver function, 
and creatine kinase in symptomatic patients). Risk of rhabdomyolysis (rare) may be 
increased in renal impairment and hypothyroidism. 

Adverse effects: muscle effects including myalgia, myopathy, myositis, and 
rhabdomyolysis (see Muscle effects above); abdominal pain, flatulence, 
constipation, dyspepsia, diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, pancreatitis, raised 
serum transaminases, hepatitis, jaundice, headache, dizziness, asthenia, 
peripheral neuropathy, paresthesia, anaemia, pruritus, alopecia, rash, 
hypersensitivity reactions (including angioedema and anaphylaxis). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 293 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

 

 

 

SECTION 13:  
Dermatological medicines (topical) 

13.1 Antifungal medicines 295 

13.2 Anti-infective medicines 298 

13.3 Anti-inflammatory and antipruritic  
medicines 301 

13.4 Astringent medicines 304 

13.5 Medicines affecting skin differentiation  
and proliferation 305 

13.6 Scabicides and pediculicides 311 

294 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

13.1 Antifungal medicines 

Ringworm 
Benzoic acid and methylrosanilinium chloride (gentian violet) (see section 13.2) 
solution are inexpensive and effective fungistatic compounds for the treatment 
of dermatophyte infections such as ringworm. Minor skin lesions due to 
ringworm can be cleared with repeated applications of compound benzoic acid 
ointment (Whitfield ointment), which combines the fungistatic action of 
benzoic acid with the keratolytic action of salicylic acid. However, the most 
effective topical treatment for dermatophyte infections is a cream containing 
an imidazole such as miconazole or clotrimazole (section 6.3), which is 
effective for long-established lesions but is more expensive than compound 
benzoic acid ointment. Extensive and generalized infections of the skin, nails 
and scalp should be treated systemically for several weeks with griseofulvin or 
fluconazole (see section 6.3).   
Scalp ringworm (tinea capitis) typically appears as a patch of scaling alopecia, 
or a swollen inflammatory area (tinea kerion). Mild forms may remit 
spontaneously at puberty. Inflamed lesions should be treated systemically with 
griseofulvin (section 6.3). Application of miconazole cream may accelerate 
healing of scaly lesions.   
Ringworm on the body (tinea corporis) can also be cleared with compound 
benzoic acid ointment or a topical imidazole such as miconazole. In resistant 
cases a 4-week course of oral griseofulvin is required (see section 6.3).   
Foot ringworm (tinea pedis or athlete’s foot) is usually treated topically. 
Compound benzoic acid ointment should be applied twice daily to all infected 
areas and all toe clefts for at least 4 weeks. Systemic therapy with griseofulvin 
or fluconazole (section 6.3) may be required if the foot is extensively infected. 
Tinea pedis commonly recurs and may be treated with miconazole cream. 
Severe weeping lesions respond to frequent soaking in solutions of 1:10 000 
potassium permanganate (section 13.2), and systemic antifungals may also be 
needed.   
Nail infections (onychomycosis, tinea unguium) are difficult to treat; 
fingernails may require 6 months treatment with oral griseofulvin (section 13.2) 
and toenails up to 12 months or more of the same treatment. Approximately 
60% of nail infections either do not respond or relapse after treatment with 
griseofulvin.   
Ringworm of the groin (tinea cruris) is usually limited to the skin of the inner 
thigh in contact with the scrotum. Flexural eczema, often superinfected with 
candida or bacteria, occurs in the same site. The latter is frequently treated 
with combined antifungal/corticosteroid preparations, but must not be treated 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 295 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

with a corticosteroid alone, as this will worsen the condition. An imidazole 
cream such as miconazole applied daily for 2 weeks is usually effective. Lesions 
unresponsive to topical preparations can usually be cleared with a 4-week 
course of griseofulvin (section 6.3).   

Candidosis 
Candida can infect the oral cavity, the vagina, or the skin. Cutaneous lesions 
tend to occur in patients with diabetes mellitus and some chronic debilitating 
conditions, including hypoparathyroidism and various congenital disorders of 
the immune system. The most severe infections of candida are now seen in 
patients with HIV infection. 
Cutaneous candidosis usually responds to twice daily applications of creams 
containing either miconazole or clotrimazole (see section 6.3). Chronic 
candida paronychia, which can result ultimately in nail dystrophy, is more 
difficult to treat. Treatment should be based on determination of the 
underlying cause and its reduction or elimination; hands and folds of the nail 
must be kept dry and daily application of an imidazole cream for several 
months may be required, ensuring penetration of the cleft between the nail 
plate and the swollen skin around the nail.   

Pityriasis versicolor 
Pityriasis (tinea) versicolor is caused by a commensal yeast. Application of 
sodium thiosulfate solution, 15% twice daily for 4 weeks is usually effective 
although areas of depigmentation on darker skins remain after completion of 
treatment. However, relapses can be frequent, probably because much of the 
infected area may appear normal and thus be left untreated. Better results have 
been reported with topical applications of miconazole or selenium sulfide.  

Benzoic acid + salicylic acid 
Cream or ointment: 6% + 3%. 

Also known as Whitfield ointment. 

Uses: mild dermatophyte infections, particularly tinea pedis and tinea corporis. 
Administration:  
Fungal skin infections, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to the affected area 
twice daily until the infected skin is shed (usually at least 4 weeks).   

Adverse effects: occasionally localized, mild inflammatory reaction.

296 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Miconazole 
Cream or ointment: 2% (nitrate). 

Miconazole is a representative topical antifungal. Various drugs can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: superficial fungal infections due to dermatophytes and yeasts, and 
secondary infections caused by Gram-positive cocci, including ringworm, 
intertrigo, candida napkin rash, paronychia, and pityriasis versicolor. 

Administration:  
Skin infections, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to clean dry lesions twice daily, 
continuing for at least 10 days after the condition has cleared. 

Nail infections, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to the affected area 1–2 times 
daily. 

Adverse effects: occasional local irritation and burning, also contact dermatitis; 
discontinue if sensitization occurs. 

Selenium sulfide 
Detergent-based suspension: 2%. 

Selenium sulfide is a complementary drug for use in rare disorders or in exceptional 
circumstances. 

Uses: pityriasis versicolor (lotion), seborrhoeic dermatitis [detergent-based 
suspension (section 13.3)]. 

Contraindications: children under 5 years. 
Precautions: do not apply to damaged skin (risk of systemic toxicity); avoid 
contact with eyes; do not use within 48 hours of applying preparations for 
hair colouring, straightening, or permanent waving. 

Administration:  

Pityriasis versicolor, ADULT and CHILD 5 years and above, apply lotion with a 
small amount of water to the entire affected area and rinse off after 
10 minutes, repeat once daily for 7–14 days; or apply undiluted lotion to the 
affected area at bedtime and rinse off the following morning, application 
repeat, 1–6 times over 2 weeks; repeat course if necessary. 

Seborrhoeic dermatitis, ADULT and CHILD 5 years and above, massage 5–10 ml 
of shampoo into wet hair and leave for 2–3 minutes before rinsing 
thoroughly; repeat twice weekly for 2 weeks, then once weekly for 2 weeks, 
thereafter only when needed. 

NOTE. To minimize absorption, rinse hair thoroughly after use and remove all traces 
from skin (including nails). 

Adverse effects: local irritation, hair discoloration or loss; absorption may 
result in systemic toxicity including tremors, weakness, lethargy, pain in 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 297 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

lower abdomen, occasional vomiting (symptoms usually resolve within 
10 days). 

Sodium thiosulfate 
Solution: 15%. 

Uses: pityriasis versicolor; cyanide poisoning (section 4.2). 
Administration: 

Pityriasis versicolor, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to the affected area twice 
daily for 4 weeks. 

13.2 Anti-infective medicines 

Staphylococcal infections of the skin (such as impetigo, folliculitis, and 
furunculi) and streptococcal infections (such as cellulitis and erysipelas) are 
very common where the climate is hot and humid, where standards of hygiene 
are compromised, and in immunodeficient patients. 
In all skin infections, an important part of treatment is cleansing and thorough 
drying. Washing with soap and water will often help to prevent infection. Light 
localized infections can often be treated effectively with an antiseptic solution 
such as chlorhexidine (section 15.1). Superficial crusts should be gently washed 
with soap and water or a weak solution of aluminium diacetate (section 13.4) 
or a 0.01% solution of potassium permanganate. Infected burns should be 
treated with silver sulfadiazine, which is bactericidal against both Gram-
positive and Gram-negative organisms. 
Topical formulations containing mupirocin 2% or fusidic acid 2% [neither are 
included on the 15th WHO Model List] can be used to treat bacterial 
infections of the skin such as impetigo and folliculitis. To prevent the 
development of resistance, mupirocin and fusidic acid should not be used for 
more than 10 days. Topical preparations containing neomycin sulfate and 
bacitracin are also widely used but these carry a risk of sensitization 
particularly with continued or repeated use. 
Topical use of preparations containing antimicrobials which are widely used to 
treat skin infections systemically should be avoided. These include the 
penicillins, the sulfonamides, streptomycin and gentamicin, which should be 
reserved for the systemic treatment of infections because of the possibility of 
inducing sensitivity and favouring the emergence of resistant organisms. Only 
widespread superficial or deep-seated skin infections associated with fever 
require treatment with a systemic antibiotic (sections 6.2.1 and 6.2.2). 

298 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Whenever possible, the choice of an antimicrobial should be based on the 
results of sensitivity tests. 

Methylrosanilinium chloride (Gentian violet) 
Aqueous solution: 0.5%.  
Tincture: 0.5%. 

Also known as gentian violet or crystal violet.   

Methylrosanilinium chloride is a representative topical anti-infective drug. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives.   

Uses: superficial fungal and bacterial infections.   
Contraindications: excoriated or ulcerated lesions, broken skin, mucous 
membranes; porphyria. 

Administration:  

Skin infections, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to affected area, 2 or 3 times 
daily for 3 days.   

Adverse effects: severe irritation (discontinue treatment); temporary staining 
of skin, permanent staining of fabrics; animal carcinogenicity (restricted use 
in some countries). 

Neomycin sulfate + bacitracin 
Ointment: 5 mg neomycin sulfate + 250 IU bacitracin zinc/g. 

Bacitracin is a representative topical antibacterial. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: superficial bacterial infections of the skin due to staphylococci and 
streptococci. 

Contraindications: neonates. 
Precautions: avoid application to substantial areas of skin or to broken skin 
(risk of significant systemic absorption); overgrowth of resistant organisms 
on prolonged use. 

Administration:  

Bacterial skin infections (short-term use), ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, apply 
sparingly to the affected areas 3 times daily. 

Adverse effects: sensitization, especially to neomycin, causing reddening and 
scaling; anaphylaxis reported rarely; systemic absorption leading to 
irreversible ototoxicity, particularly in children, the elderly, and in those with 
renal impairment. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 299 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Potassium permanganate 
Aqueous solution: 1:10 000. 

NOTE. Potassium permanganate is sometimes supplied as an aqueous stock solution 
of 1 in 1000 (0.1%) for dilution before use. 

Uses: wet dressings to assist healing of suppurating superficial wounds, 
tropical ulcers, pemphigus, impetigo; tinea pedis (section 13.1). 

Contraindications: avoid occlusive dressings. 
Precautions: irritant to mucous membranes. 
Administration:  

Impetigo, ADULT and CHILD, apply dressings soaked in a 1:10 000 (0.01%) 
solution until superficial crusts can be gently separated. 

Suppurating superficial wounds and tropical ulcers, ADULT and CHILD, apply 
dressings soaked in a 1:10 000 (0.01%) solution to the affected area, changing 
dressings 2 or 3 times daily; tropical ulcers also require treatment with 
procaine benzylpenicillin for 2–4 weeks (section 6.2.1). 

Tinea pedis, ADULT and CHILD, bathe severe weeping lesions in a 1:10 000 
(0.01%) solution every 8 hours. 

Adverse effects: local irritation; skin and fabrics stained brown. 

Silver sulfadiazine 
Cream: 1%, in 500-g container. 

Uses: prophylaxis and treatment of infection in burns. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfonamides; pregnancy (Appendix 2); 
neonates. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Annex 4); hepatic impairment (Annex 5); 
G6PD deficiency; breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Administration:  

Infection in burns, ADULT and CHILD, apply using aseptic technique once daily 
(more frequently if volume of exudate is large) whilst there is a possibility of 
infection, or until healing is complete. 

Adverse effects: allergic reactions including rash, burning, and itching; argyria 
and sulfonamide-induced systemic toxicity, including blood disorders 
following application to large areas or prolonged use; transient leukopenia 
reported. 

 

300 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

 
13.3 Anti-inflammatory and antipruritic medicines 

Contact dermatitis 
Contact dermatitis can result from an allergic or irritant skin reaction. Removal 
of the substance provoking the reaction is the first step in treating this 
condition. Mild cases of contact dermatitis can be treated with topical 
hydrocortisone which suppresses inflammation. A short course of oral 
prednisolone (section 3) or a topical corticosteroid such as betamethasone 
should be considered for more severe cases and for suppression of severe 
acute reactions associated with blistering, exudation, and oedema. Soaking in 
clean water or mild saline solution is recommended in the acute stages of 
severe dermatitis. 

Pruritus 
Pruritus or itching is a common symptom of many skin diseases. However, 
systemic disease, contact with certain substances, conditions that dry the skin, 
stress, and extremes of temperature may also be a cause. Thus, an important 
part of treatment for pruritis is to eliminate or minimize any underlying cause 
for the irritation. 
Emollients, such as aqueous creams and emulsifying creams, are of value in 
pruritus associated with dry skin or in pruritus occurring in an otherwise 
healthy elderly individual; the value of calamine lotion in such cases is, 
however, uncertain. Systemic antihistamines, such as oral chlorphenamine 
(section 3), may relieve generalized pruritus. Topical corticosteroids, such as 
hydrocortisone or betamethasone, are appropriate for treating insect stings.  

Atopic dermatitis 
Atopic dermatitis (or eczema) is a common skin disorder, which mainly occurs 
in infants and children; it is associated with intense itching, with areas of red 
skin. Pruritus may be partially relieved by applying astringent aluminium 
diacetate (section 13.4) solution to exudative lesions and emollients to 
lichenified plaques. Topical hydrocortisone should be applied in short courses 
of 1–2 weeks to treat even mild areas of involvement. The use of topical 
betamethasone should be reserved for the treatment of persistent localized 
the dermatitis in adults. Topical antihistamines are not effective and should be 
avoided because of the risk of sensitization. However, a sedative antihistamine 
such as chlorphenamine can be given at night to calm pruritus and facilitate 
sleep (section 3). A secondary infection, often involving Staphylococcus aureus, 
may be responsible for exacerbations; in such cases, a short course (7–10 days) 
of an oral antibiotic such as erythromycin can be given (section 6.2.2). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 301 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Seborrhoeic dermatitis 
Use of a keratolytic shampoo and exposure to ultraviolet light reduce both the 
inflammation and the scaling resulting from seborrhoeic dermatitis of the scalp 
(dandruff). The shampoo should be massaged into the scalp, immediately 
rinsed off and then reapplied until a foam is produced, leaving the second 
application in contact with the scalp for at least 5 minutes. Selenium sulfide 
(section 13.1), which has both antifungal and keratolytic properties, is widely 
used in many proprietary shampoos. Preparations containing a combination of 
sulfur and salicylic acid, which have an additional antimicrobial action, are also 
effective. 

Ichthyosis 
In ichthyosis, emollients should be applied daily (or more frequently in severe 
cases) to affected skin. The addition of a keratolytic, such as salicylic acid 
(section 13.5) can be helpful. 

Lichen planus 
Lichen planus is a chronic, papular, pruritic skin eruption that occurs typically 
in middle age and later life; the condition is often mild and may need no 
treatment. In generalized mild cases, a topical corticosteroid, such as 
hydrocortisone, may relieve pruritus. In severe forms, systemic treatment may 
be necessary; oral corticosteroids (such as prednisolone; see section 3); 
ciclosporin (see section 8.1) and retinoids [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List] have been used. 

Pityriasis rosea 
In pityriasis rosea, a common self-limiting dermatosis that is probably of 
infective origin, calamine lotion helps to relieve pruritus in most cases. If it 
does not, topical application of hydrocortisone in a concentration not 
exceeding 1% may be tried. 

Betamethasone 
Cream or ointment: 0.1% (as valerate). 

Betamethasone is a representative potent topical corticosteroid. Various medicines can 
serve as alternatives. 

Uses: severe inflammatory skin conditions including contact dermatitis, atopic 
dermatitis (eczema), seborrhoeic dermatitis, lichen planus, and intractable 
pruritus; psoriasis of the scalp, hands, and feet (section 13.5). 

Contraindications: untreated skin infections, broken skin, rosacea, acne, 
perioral dermatitis. 

302 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Precautions: children (avoid prolonged use and use under specialist 
supervision); psoriasis (may precipitate severe pustular psoriasis on 
withdrawal; avoid in widespread plaque psoriasis); adrenal suppression if 
used on a large area of the body or for a long time, particularly with an 
occlusive dressing; avoid use on the face for more than 7 days; secondary 
infection requires treatment with an appropriate antimicrobial. 

Administration:  

Inflammatory skin conditions, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years of age, apply 
sparingly to the affected area, 1–2 times daily until improvement occurs, 
then less frequently. 

Adverse effects: exacerbation of local infection; local atrophic changes 
(particularly on the face and in skinfolds), characterized by thinning of the 
dermis, depigmentation, dilatation of superficial blood vessels, and 
formation of striae; contact dermatitis; perioral dermatitis; acne at site of 
application; suppression of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis with 
prolonged or widespread use (particularly under occlusion); hypertrichosis 
reported. 

Calamine lotion 
Lotion. 

Calamine is a representative topical antipruritic. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: mild pruritus. 
Administration:  

Mild pruritus, ADULT and CHILD, apply liberally to the entire affected area  
3–4 times daily. 

Hydrocortisone 
Cream or ointment: 1% (acetate). 

Hydrocortisone is a representative mild topical corticosteroid. Various medicines can 
serve as alternatives. 

Uses: contact dermatitis, atopic dermatitis (eczema), lichen planus; pityriasis 
rosea; intractable pruritus and phototoxic reactions, including polymorphic 
light eruptions and actinic prurigo; short-term treatment of psoriasis of the 
face and flexures (section 13.5). 

Contraindications: untreated skin infections, broken skin, rosacea, acne, 
perioral dermatitis. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 303 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Precautions: children (avoid prolonged use); concomitant use with occlusive 
dressings (may increase penetration into keratinized lesions); secondary 
infection requires treatment with an appropriate antimicrobial. 

Administration:  

Inflammatory skin conditions, ADULT and CHILD apply sparingly to the affected 
area, 1–2 times daily until improvement occurs, then less frequently. 

Adverse effects: exacerbation of local infection; atrophic changes (see under 
Betamethasone) less likely with mild corticosteroids, but infants and 
children particularly susceptible; contact dermatitis; perioral dermatitis; 
hypertrichosis reported. 

13.4 Astringent medicines 

Aluminium diacetate is a topical astringent used as an antiseptic for various 
skin conditions including suppurating superficial wounds and tropical ulcers, 
and the lesions produced by impetigo and pemphigus. 

Aluminium diacetate 
Solution: 5%. 

Uses: wet dressings to assist healing of suppurating superficial wounds, 
tropical ulcers, and eczematous skin lesions; removal of adherent crusts. 

Precautions: avoid use of plastic or rubber occlusive dressings. 
Administration:  

Impetigo and pemphigus, ADULT and CHILD, apply dressings soaked in 0.65% 
solution until superficial crusts can be separated. 

Suppurating superficial wounds and tropical ulcers, ADULT and CHILD, apply 
dressings soaked in a 0.65% solution to the affected area for 30–120 minutes 
daily, changing dressings every 5–15 minutes; tropical ulcers also require 
treatment with procaine benzylpenicillin for 2–4 weeks (section 6.2.1). 

DILUTION. Aluminium diacetate solution, 5% should be diluted before use, 1 part in 
7.7 parts water, to give a 0.65% solution. 

304 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

13.5 Medicines affecting skin differentiation and 
proliferation 

Acne vulgaris  
Acne is a disorder of the pilosebaceous follicles and typically first appears 
during puberty when androgenic stimulation triggers excessive production of 
sebum. Mild acne is characterized by comedones and a few pustules which heal 
without scarring, and usually responds to topical therapy alone. In moderate acne, 
where there are more extensive pustules causing mild scarring, oral antibiotics 
such as a tetracycline or erythromycin (section 6.2.2) are commonly used. In 
severe acne, widespread pustules are accompanied by nodular abscesses and cysts, 
requiring systemic treatment with estrogens (section 18.4), antiandrogens, or 
retinoids [not included on the 15th WHO Model List]. Since scarring of the 
skin resulting from severe nodular acne causes major distress, acne should 
always be treated as soon as possible. Exposure to substances suspected of 
causing or aggravating the condition should be avoided. Systemic treatment 
must be continued for several months before a response can be anticipated. 
During this time, topical preparations should be applied to the affected areas 
to prevent the development of new lesions.  
Benzoyl peroxide is a keratolytic drug with bacteriostatic activity against 
Propionibacterium acnes; it is a component of many proprietary topical 
preparations for the treatment of mild to moderate acne. Treatment is usually 
started at a lower strength and increased as tolerance develops to the initial 
irritant reaction. Preparations containing sulfur, which is bactericidal and 
promotes desquamation, are also often used, and may be combined with 
salicylic acid, which is a keratolytic agent.  
Antibiotics, such as clindamycin (section 6.2.2) are widely used in a topical 
form to treat inflammatory acne. However, treatment must be maintained for 
2–3 months before any benefit is seen and this prolonged course carries the 
risk of selection and spread of antibiotic-resistant organisms. 

Psoriasis  
Psoriasis, which affects people of all ages in all countries, and is one of the 
most common chronic dermatoses in industrialized countries, is characterized 
by epidermal thickening and scaling. Considerable local variations in its 
prevalence have been variously attributed to genetic, nutritional, and 
environmental factors. Various biological events may trigger psoriasis, such as 
streptococcal or viral infection, an emotional crisis, or pregnancy. Occasionally 
psoriasis may be provoked or exacerbated by drugs such as ACE inhibitors, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 305 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (beta-blockers), chloroquine, lithium, and non-
steroidal anti-inflammators.  
Psoriasis vulgaris (chronic plaque psoriasis) is the most common form of the 
condition, usually affecting extensor surfaces of the limbs and the scalp. Guttate 
psoriasis, commonly seen in children, is often caused by a streptococcal 
infection; lesions may disappear following antimicrobial treatment. The 
condition is also known to resolve spontaneously but more commonly 
transforms into chronic plaque psoriasis. No treatment assures remission, but 
sunlight often clears lesions.  
Emollients reduce dryness, scaling, and cracking, and may have an 
antiproliferative effect in psoriasis. They may be all that is necessary for mild 
psoriasis and they are useful adjuncts to more specific treatments such as with 
coal tar, dithranol, and vitamin D analogues [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List]. A preparation containing urea (carbamide), 10%, which has 
moisturizing and keratolytic properties, may prove more effective than an 
emollient.  
Dithranol restores the normal rate of epidermal cell proliferation and 
keratinization. Localized psoriasis vulgaris can frequently be cleared by daily 
applications for a period of 2–4 weeks. A short contact method of application 
causes little, if any, irritation or staining of normal skin, and is particularly 
useful for outpatient management. There is a risk of severe conjunctivitis if 
dithranol enters the eye.  
Crude coal tar is also effective in the treatment of psoriasis. Some preparations 
also contain salicylic acid as a keratolytic. Good results are often obtained 
when daily applications or baths are combined with exposure to ultraviolet 
light or sunlight.  
Topical corticosteroids have a limited role in psoriasis. A mild corticosteroid 
such as hydrocortisone (section 13.3) may be used on the face and flexures, 
whereas a potent corticosteroid such as betamethasone (section 13.3) is most 
appropriate for the scalp, hands, and feet. However, when extensive areas of 
the body surface are involved or when there is erythrodermic psoriasis, 
sufficient may be absorbed to cause adrenal suppression; also rebound often 
occurs after stopping treatment, resulting in a more unstable form of psoriasis.  
Systemic treatment may be needed for severe, resistant, unstable or 
complicated psoriasis; treatment should be initiated under specialist 
supervision. Systemic treatments include acitretin [not included on the 15th 
WHO Model List], ciclosporin (section 8.1) and methotrexate (section 2.4). 

306 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Actinic keratosis  
The lesions of actinic keratosis are distributed primarily over sun-exposed 
areas. Horny growths, which are often covered by light brown scales, are 
usually asymptomatic but can be disfiguring. They respond to light cautery and 
cryosurgery or topical application of fluorouracil over a 3–week period. Simple 
emollients may be satisfactory for people with many lesions.  

Warts  
Warts most commonly affect the hands, feet (plantar warts, verrucas), and 
anogenital region (condylomata acuminata); all are caused by the human 
papilloma virus. They may regress spontaneously at any time within months or 
years of their first appearance; however, particularly in immunosuppressed 
patients, they may spread and be difficult to cure. Many common, plane and 
plantar warts can reasonably be left untreated, but painful or unsightly lesions 
generally respond to application of topical preparations containing salicylic 
acid. Where available, cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen applied with a cotton-
tip or a spray is highly effective; however, freezing the skin can produce 
temporary or permanent depigmentation (particularly on dark skin), and 
should be used with caution.  
Anogenital warts are usually transmitted by sexual contact; they should always 
be treated, although they frequently recur, because of the increased risk of 
cervical cancer. Podophyllum resin, a caustic antimitotic agent, may be applied 
to small external lesions. The risk of extensive local necrosis and of systemic 
toxicity excludes the use of podophyllum resin on larger surfaces. When 
available, podophyllotoxin is a less toxic alternative. Where podophyllum is 
contraindicated or ineffective, surgical removal, electrocautery, cryosurgery, or 
laser therapy are possible options. 

Benzoyl peroxide 
Cream or lotion: 5%. 

Uses: mild to moderate acne and as an adjunct to oral therapy in more severe 
cases. 

Precautions: avoid contact with eyes, mouth, and mucous membranes; avoid 
use of occlusive dressings; avoid excessive exposure to sunlight. 

Administration:  

Acne, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, initially apply directly to clean skin on alternate 
days, increasing frequency to 1–2 times daily as tolerance to irritant effect 
develops. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 307 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Adverse effects: initial irritation common but subsides with continued use (in 
some cases may need to reduce frequency of application or temporarily 
suspend use); rarely contact sensitivity occurs, and occasionally even one 
application can cause severe irritation; may bleach fabrics, hair, and skin. 

Coal tar 
Solution: 5%. 

Uses: chronic psoriasis, either alone or in combination with exposure to 
ultraviolet light. 

Contraindications: inflamed, broken or infected skin. 
Precautions: skin protection possibly required to reduce photosensitivity 
reactions. 

Administration:  

Psoriasis, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to the affected area 1–3 times daily, 
preferably starting with lower strength preparation or add 100 ml to bath of 
tepid water and soak affected area for 10–20 minutes, once daily to once 
every 3 days for at least 10 baths; bathing can be alternated with exposure to 
ultraviolet (UVB) rays, allowing at least 24 hours between exposure and 
treatment with coal tar. 

Adverse effects: irritation, photosensitivity reactions; rarely hypersensitivity; 
skin, hair, and fabrics discoloured. 

Dithranol 
Ointment: 0.1-2%. 

Uses: moderately severe psoriasis. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity; avoid use on face, acute eruptions, 
excessively inflamed areas. 

Precautions: irritant (avoid contact with eyes and healthy skin). 
Administration:  

Psoriasis (initiate under medical supervision), ADULT and CHILD, starting with 
a lower strength preparation (0.1%), carefully apply directly to lesions only, 
leave in contact for 30 minutes, then wash off thoroughly; repeat 
application daily, gradually increasing strength to 2% and contact time to 60 
minutes at weekly intervals; some 0.1–0.5% strength preparations are 
suitable for overnight use. 

NOTE: Wash hands thoroughly after use. 

308 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Adverse effects: local irritation; excessive erythema or spread of lesions 
(discontinue use); conjunctivitis following contact with eyes; staining of skin, 
hair, and fabrics. 

Fluorouracil 
Ointment: 5%. 

Uses: premalignant and malignant skin conditions, including actinic keratosis; 
malignant disease (section 8.2). 

Contraindications: haemorrhagic ulcerated tissue. 
Precautions: avoid mucous membranes and eyes; since ultraviolet light 
intensifies the inflammatory reaction, avoid prolonged exposure to sunlight. 

Administration:  

Premalignant and malignant skin conditions including actinic keratosis, ADULT, 
apply thinly to the affected area, 1–2 times daily until a marked inflammatory 
response occurs (usually 3–4 weeks); cover with occlusive dressing in 
malignant conditions; healing may require further 2 months after 
completion of treatment; maximum area of skin treated at one time, 
500 cm2. 

NOTE. Avoid use of a metal applicator. 

Adverse effects: local inflammatory and allergic reactions; rarely erythema 
multiforme; photosensitivity reactions during, and for up to 2 months after 
treatment. 

Podophyllum resin 
Solution: 10-25%. 

Podophyllum resin is a representative antimitotic agent used to treat warts. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: external anogenital warts; plantar warts. 
Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
children. 

Precautions: avoid use on large areas; very irritant to eyes (keep away from 
face); avoid contact with normal skin, mucus membranes, and open wounds. 

Administration:  

Warts, ADULT, apply carefully to warts, avoiding contact with normal tissue; 
rinse off after 1–6 hours; may be repeated at weekly intervals but no more 
than 4 times in all; only few warts should be treated at any one time. 

NOTE. Must be applied by a trained health-care professional. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 309 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Adverse effects: systemic effects resulting from cutaneous absorption include 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea; also transient leukopenia 
and thrombocytopenia; renal failure; delayed neurotoxicity including visual 
and auditory hallucinations, delusions, disorientation, confusion, and 
delirium following excessive application. 

Salicylic acid 
Solution: 5%. 

Uses: hyperkeratotic conditions, including warts; adjunct in treatment of 
psoriasis, ringworm (section 13.1), seborrhoeic dermatitis (section 13.3), 
ichthyosis (section 13.3). 

Contraindications: broken or inflamed skin; children under 2 years. 
Precautions: significant peripheral neuropathy; patients with diabetes at risk of 
neuropathic ulcers; avoid contact with eyes, mouth, and mucous 
membranes; avoid application to large areas. 

Administration:  

Hyperkeratotic skin disorders, including warts, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly 
to the affected area once daily, starting with lower strength preparations; 
gradually increase strength until a satisfactory response is obtained. 

NOTE. Protect surrounding skin; rub warts gently with file or pumice stone once 
weekly. 

Adverse effects: local irritation, dermatitis; salicylism on excessive application 
or treatment of large areas, particularly in children. 

Urea 
Cream or ointment: 10%. 

Also known as Carbamide. 

Uses: hydrating agent and keratolytic for dry, scaling and itching skin 
conditions, including mild psoriasis. 

Precautions: avoid application to face or broken skin; avoid contact with eyes. 
Administration:  
Dry, scaling skin disorders, ADULT and CHILD, apply directly to the affected 
area twice daily, preferably to damp skin. 

Adverse effects: transient stinging and local irritation. 

310 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

13.6 Scabicides and pediculicides 

Scabies 
Scabies is caused by a mite, Sarcoptes scabiei, that burrows into the skin. It is 
readily transmitted from person to person, and therefore the entire household 
must be treated at the same time to prevent reinfection. Although it is not 
necessary to take a bath before treatment with an acaricide, all clothing and 
bedding should be washed to prevent reinfection. 
Benzyl benzoate is an inexpensive scabicide. It must be applied to all skin 
surfaces, from the scalp to the soles of the feet, avoiding contact with the eyes; 
it is, however, too irritant for use on children. Permethrin is less irritant and, 
usually, more effective than benzyl benzoate; it is also more expensive, but it 
may be used on children. Young infants can be treated with a cream containing 
precipitated sulfur, 6–10%, applied once daily for one week. 
Ivermectin (section 6.1.2) in a single oral dose of 200 micrograms/kg may be 
used in combination with topical drugs for the treatment of hyperkeratotic 
scabies that does not respond to topical treatment alone. 

Pediculosis 
Pediculosis of the head and body is caused by Pediculus humanus capitis and 
Pediculus humanus corporis respectively; pubic lice (crab lice) infestations are 
caused by Pthirus pubis, which may also affect the eye lashes and brows. All are 
transmitted by person to person contact, and may also contaminate clothing 
and bedding. All members of the affected household (and sexual contacts) 
must be treated at the same time, and clothing and bedding should be washed 
or exposed to the air; in head lice infestations, hair brushes and combs should 
also be disinfected. 
Head and body lice are readily treated with permethrin; malathion [not 
included on the 15th WHO Model List] is effective against pubic lice. Benzyl 
benzoate may be used for all lice infestations. 

Benzyl benzoate 
Lotion: 25%. 

Benzyl benzoate is a representative parasiticide. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: scabies; head, body, and pubic lice. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 311 



13. Dermatological medicines (topical) 

Precautions: do not use on inflamed or broken skin; avoid contact with eyes 
and mucous membranes; not recommended for children; breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3) (withhold during treatment). 

Administration:  
Scabies, ADULT and CHILD, apply over whole body; repeat application without 
bathing on the following day and wash off 24 hours later; a third application 
may be needed in some cases. 

Pediculosis, ADULT and CHILD, apply to the affected area and wash off 
24 hours later; further applications possibly needed after 7 and 14 days. 

Adverse effects: local irritation, particularly in children. 

Permethrin 
Cream: 5%. Lotion: 1%. 

Uses: scabies; head and body lice. 
Precautions: do not use on inflamed or broken skin; avoid contact with eyes; 
breastfeeding (Annex 3) (withhold during treatment). 

Administration:  
Scabies and body lice, ADULT and CHILD, apply cream over whole body and 
wash off after 8–12 hours; if hands area washed with soap within 8 hours of 
application, treat the hands again; repeat application after 7 days. 

Head lice, ADULT and CHILD, apply lotion to clean, damp hair and rinse off 
after 10 minutes. 

Adverse effects: local irritation; rarely rash and oedema. 

312 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



14. Diagnostic agents 

 

 

 

SECTION 14:  
Diagnostic agents 

14.1 Ophthalmic medicines 314 

14.2 Radiocontrast media 315 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 313 



14. Diagnostic agents 

14.1 Ophthalmic medicines 

For general information on the use of eye drops, see section 21. 
Fluorescein is used in ocular diagnostic procedures and for locating damaged 
areas of the cornea due to injury or disease. 
Tropicamide is a short-acting relatively weak mydriatic that dilates the pupil 
and paralyses the ciliary muscle. It facilitates the examination of the fundus of 
the eye. 

Fluorescein 
Eye drops: 1% (sodium salt). 

Uses: detection of lesions and foreign bodies in the eye.   
Contraindications: avoid use with soft contact lenses.   
Precautions: transient blurring of vision (see below).    
SKILLED TASKS. Transient blurring of vision; advise patient not to operate 
machinery or drive until vision is clear.   
Administration:  
Detection of lesions and foreign bodies in the eye, by ocular instillation, ADULT 
and CHILD, instil sufficient solution dropwise to stain the damaged area. 

Tropicamide 
Eye drops: 0.5%. 

Tropicamide is a representative mydriatic. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: dilatation of the pupil to examine the fundus. 
Precautions: hypermetropic (long-sighted) patients and patients aged over 
60 years may precipitate acute angle-closure glaucoma); darkly pigmented 
iris (more resistant to pupillary dilatation; exercise caution to avoid 
overdosage). 

SKILLED TASKS. Advise patient not to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving for 1–2 hours after mydriasis. 
Administration:  
Dilatation of pupil to examine the fundus, by ocular instillation, ADULT and 

CHILD, 1 drop, 15–20 minutes before examination of the eye. 
Adverse effects: transient stinging and raised intraocular pressure; local 
irritation, hyperaemia, oedema, and conjunctivitis (on prolonged 
administration). 

314 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



14. Diagnostic agents 

 
14.2 Radiocontrast media 

Radiographic contrast media are needed for delineating soft tissue structures 
such as blood vessels, stomach, bowel loops, and body cavities that are not 
otherwise visualized by standard X-ray examination. The contrast media in this 
group, which all contain heavy atoms (metal or iodine), absorb a significantly 
different amount of X-rays than the surrounding soft tissue, thereby making 
the exposed structures visible on radiographs.  
Barium sulfate is a metal salt which is used to delineate the gastrointestinal 
tract. It is not absorbed by the body and does not interfere with stomach or 
bowel secretion or produce misleading radiographic artefacts. Barium sulfate 
may be used in either single- or double-contrast techniques or computer-
assisted axial tomography. In double-contrast examinations gas is introduced 
into the gastrointestinal tract by using suspensions of barium sulfate containing 
carbon dioxide or by using separate gas-producing preparations based on 
sodium bicarbonate. Air administered through a gastrointestinal tube can be 
used as an alternative to carbon dioxide to achieve a double-contrast effect.  
Amidotrizoates (meglumine amidotrizoate and sodium amidotrizoate) are 
iodinated ionic monomeric organic compounds. Although both salts have 
been used alone in diagnostic radiography (including computer-assisted axial 
tomography), a mixture of both is often preferred so as to minimize adverse 
effects and to improve the quality of the examination. Amidotrizoates are used 
in a wide range of procedures including urography, and examination of the 
gallbladder, biliary ducts, and spleen. Owing to their high osmolality, they are 
associated with a high incidence of adverse effects. The osmolality for a given 
radiodensity which depends on iodine concentration, can be reduced by using 
an ionic dimeric medium such as meglumine iotroxate, which contains twice 
the number of iodine atoms in a molecule, or by using a non-ionic medium 
such as iohexol. Low osmolality radiocontrast media such as iohexol are 
associated with a reduction in some adverse effects (see below), but they are 
generally more expensive. Iohexol is used for a wide range of diagnostic 
procedures including urography, angiography and arthrography, and also in 
computer-assisted axial tomography. Meglumine iotroxate is excreted into the 
bile after intravenous administration and is used for cholecystography and 
cholangiography. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 315 



14. Diagnostic agents 

Hypersensitivity 
Anaphylactoid reactions to iodinated radiocontrast media are more common 
with ionic, high osmolality compounds. Patients with a history of asthma or 
allergy, drug hypersensitivity, adrenal suppression, heart disease, previous 
reaction to contrast media, and those receiving beta-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(beta-blockers) are at increased risk. Non-ionic media are preferred for these 
patients and beta-blockers should be discontinued if possible. 

Amidotrizoate 
Injection: 140-420 mg iodine (as sodium or meglumine salt)/ml in 20-ml 
ampoule. 

Meglumine amidotrizoate and sodium amidotrizoate are representative iodinated ionic 
monomeric radiocontrast media. Various media can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: urography, venography, operative cholangiography, splenoportography, 
arthrography, diskography; computer-assisted axial tomography. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to iodine-containing compounds. 
Precautions: history of allergy, atopy, or asthma; severe hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); dehydration (correct fluid 
and electrolyte balance before administration); multiple myeloma (risk of 
fatal renal failure if dehydrated); cardiac disease, hypertension, 
phaeochromocytoma, sickle-cell disease, hyperthyroidism, the elderly or 
debilitated patients, and children (increased risk of adverse effects); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); may interfere with 
thyroid function tests; concomitant use of biguanides (withdraw 48 hours 
before administration; restart when renal function stabilized). 

NOTE: Important: because of risk of hypersensitivity reactions, adequate resuscitation 
facilities must be immediately available when radiographic procedures are carried out. 
Dose:  

Diagnostic radiography, ADULT and CHILD, route of administration and dosage 
depend on procedure and preparation used (consult manufacturer’s 
literature). 

ADMINISTRATION. By specialist radiographers only, according to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, metallic taste, flushing, 
sensations of heat, weakness, dizziness, headache, cough, rhinitis, sweating, 
sneezing, lacrimation, visual disturbances, pruritus, salivary gland 
enlargement, pallor, cardiac disorders, haemodynamic disturbances and 
hypotension; disseminated intravascular coagulation; fibrinolysis and 
depression of blood coagulation factors; rarely nephrotoxicity, convulsions, 
paralysis, coma, rigors, arrhythmias, pulmonary oedema, circulatory failure 

316 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



14. Diagnostic agents 

and cardiac arrest; occasionally anaphylactoid or hypersensitivity reactions; 
hyperthyroidism; pain on injection; extravasation may result in tissue 
damage, thrombophlebitis, thrombosis, venospasm, and embolism. 

Barium sulfate 
Aqueous suspension. 

Uses: radiographic examination of the gastrointestinal tract. 
Contraindications: intestinal obstruction, and/or conditions such as pyloric 
stenosis or lesions which predispose to obstruction; intestinal perforation or 
conditions with risk of perforation, such as acute ulcerative colitis, 
diverticulitis, or after rectal or colonic biopsy, sigmoidoscopy or 
radiotherapy. 

Precautions: maintain adequate hydration after procedure to prevent severe 
constipation. 

Dose:  
Radiographic examination of the gastrointestinal tract, ADULT and CHILD, 
route of administration and dosage depend on procedure and preparation 
used (consult manufacturer’s literature). 

ADMINISTRATION. Only by specialist radiographers, according to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: constipation or diarrhoea, gastrointestinal obstruction, 
appendicitis, abdominal cramps, and bleeding; perforation of bowel 
resulting in peritonitis, adhesions, granulomas and high mortality rate; 
electrocardiographical changes (with rectal administration); pneumonitis or 
granuloma formation (following accidental aspiration into lungs). 

Iohexol 
Injection: 140-350 mg iodine/ml in 5-ml; 10-ml; 20-ml ampoules. 

Iohexol is a representative iodinated non-ionic radiocontrast medium. Various media 
can serve as alternatives.   

Uses: urography, venography, angiography, ventriculography, operative 
cholangiography, splenoportography, arthrography, diskography; computer-
assisted axial tomography.   

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to iodine-containing compounds. 
Precautions: history of allergy, atopy or asthma; severe hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); dehydration (correct fluid 
and electrolyte balance before administration); multiple myeloma (risk of 
fatal renal failure if dehydrated); cardiac disease, hypertension, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 317 



14. Diagnostic agents 

phaeochromocytoma, sickle-cell disease, hyperthyroidism, the elderly or 
debilitated patients, and children (increased risk of adverse effects); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); may interfere with 
thyroid-function tests; concomitant use of biguanides (withdraw 48 hours 
before administration; restart when renal function stabilized). 

NOTE: Important: because of risk of hypersensitivity reactions, adequate 
resuscitation facilities must be immediately available when radiographic procedures are 
carried out.   
Dose:  

Diagnostic radiography, ADULT and CHILD, route of administration and dosage 
depend on procedure and preparation used (consult manufacturer’s 
literature). 

ADMINISTRATION. Only by specialist radiographers, according to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, metallic taste, flushing, sensations of heat, 
weakness, dizziness, headache, cough, rhinitis, sweating, sneezing, 
lacrimation, visual disturbances, pruritus, salivary gland enlargement, pallor, 
cardiac disorders, haemodynamic disturbances and hypotension, 
nephrotoxicity; rarely convulsions, paralysis, coma, rigors, arrhythmias, 
pulmonary oedema, circulatory failure, and cardiac arrest; occasionally 
anaphylactoid or hypersensitivity reactions; hyperthyroidism; pain on 
injection; extravasation may result in tissue damage, thrombophlebitis, 
thrombosis, venospasm, and embolism. 

Meglumine iotroxate 
Solution: 5-8 g iodine in 100-250 ml. 

Meglumine iotroxate is a representative iodinated ionic dimeric radiocontrast medium. 
Various media can serve as alternatives. It is a complementary medicine. 

Uses: examination of the gallbladder and biliary tract. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to iodine-containing compounds. 
Precautions: history of allergy, atopy or asthma; severe hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); dehydration (correct fluid 
and electrolyte balance before administration); multiple myeloma (risk of 
fatal renal failure if dehydrated); cardiac disease, hypertension, 
phaeochromocytoma, sickle-cell disease, hyperthyroidism, the elderly or 
debilitated patients, and children (increased risk of adverse effects); 
pregnancy; breastfeeding; may interfere with thyroid-function tests; 
concomitant use of biguanides (withdraw 48 hours before administration; 
restart when renal function stabilized). 

318 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



14. Diagnostic agents 

NOTE: Important:  because of risk of hypersensitivity reactions, adequate 
resuscitation facilities must be immediately available during radiographic procedures. 
Dose:  

Examination of gallbladder and biliary tract, by intravenous injection, ADULT, 
100 ml of meglumine iotroxate solution, 10.5% over at least 15 minutes 
(consult manufacturer’s literature). 

ADMINISTRATION. By specialist radiographers only, according to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, metallic taste, flushing, sensations of heat, 
weakness, dizziness, headache, cough, rhinitis, sweating, sneezing, 
lacrimation, visual disturbances, pruritus, salivary gland enlargement, pallor, 
cardiac disorders, haemodynamic disturbances and hypotension or 
hypertension; rarely, convulsions, paralysis, coma, rigors, arrhythmias, 
pulmonary oedema, circulatory failure, and cardiac arrest; occasionally 
anaphylactoid or hypersensitivity reactions; hyperthyroidism; pain on 
injection; extravasation may result in tissue damage, thrombophlebitis, 
thrombosis, venospasm, and embolism. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 319 



15. Disinfectants and antiseptics 

 

 

 

SECTION 15:  
Disinfectants and antiseptics 

15.1 Antiseptics 321 

15.2 Disinfectants 323 

320 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



15. Disinfectants and antiseptics 

15.1 Antiseptics 

An antiseptic is a type of disinfectant, which destroys or inhibits growth of 
microorganisms on living tissues without causing harm when applied to 
surfaces of the body or to exposed tissues. Some antiseptics can be applied to 
the unbroken skin or mucous membranes, to burns, and to open wounds to 
prevent sepsis by removing or excluding microbes from these areas. 
Iodine has been modified for use as an antiseptic. The iodophore, polyvidone 
iodine, is effective against bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa, cysts, and spores, 
and significantly reduces surgical wound infections. The solution of 
polyvidone iodine releases iodine on contact with the skin.  
Chlorhexidine has a wide spectrum of bactericidal and bacteriostatic activity 
and is effective against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria 
although it is less effective against some species of Pseudomonas and Proteus and 
is relatively inactive against mycobacteria. It is not active against bacterial 
spores at room temperature. Chlorhexidine is incompatible with soaps and 
other anionic materials, such as bicarbonates, chlorides, and phosphates, 
forming salts of low solubility which may precipitate out of solution.  
Ethanol has bactericidal activity and is used to disinfect skin prior to injection, 
venepuncture or surgical procedures. It is also used to disinfect hands and to 
clean surfaces. 

Chlorhexidine 
Solution: 5% (digluconate) for dilution. 

Chlorhexidine is a representative disinfectant and antiseptic. Various agents can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: antiseptic; disinfection of clean instruments. 
Precautions: aqueous solutions (which are susceptible to microbial 
contamination should be freshly prepared; appropriate measures required to 
prevent contamination during storage or dilution); instruments with 
cemented glass components (avoid preparations containing surface active 
agents); irritant (avoid contact with middle ear, eyes, brain, and meninges); 
not for use in body cavities; alcoholic solutions not suitable before 
diathermy; syringes and needles treated with chlorhexidine (rinse thoroughly 
with sterile water or saline before use); inactivated by cork (use glass, plastic 
or rubber closures); alcohol-based solutions are flammable. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 321 



15. Disinfectants and antiseptics 

Administration:  
Antiseptic (pre-operative skin disinfection and hand washing), ADULT and 

CHILD, use 0.5% solution in alcohol (70%) or 2 or 4% detergent solution to 
the skin area. 

Antiseptic (wounds, burns, and other skin damage), ADULT and CHILD, apply 
0.05% aqueous solution directly to the affected area. 

Disinfection of clean instruments, immerse for at least 30 minutes in 0.05% 
solution containing sodium nitrite 0.1% (to inhibit metal corrosion). 

Emergency disinfection of clean instruments, immerse for 2 minutes in 0.5% 
solution in alcohol (70%). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer's directions. 

Adverse effects: occasional skin sensitivity and irritation. 

Ethanol 
Solution: 70% (denatured). 

Ethanol is a representative disinfectant and antiseptic. Various agents can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: disinfection of skin prior to injection, venepuncture, or surgical 
procedures. 

Precautions: flammable; avoid broken skin; patients have suffered severe 
burns when diathermy has been preceded by application of alcoholic skin 
disinfectants. 

Administration:  
Disinfection of skin, ADULT and CHILD, apply undiluted solution directly to the 
skin area. 

Adverse effects: skin dryness and irritation with frequent application. 

Polyvidone iodine 
Solution: 10%. 

Also known as Povidone–iodine.   

Polyvidone iodine is a representative antiseptic. Various agents can serve as 
alternatives.   

Uses: antiseptic; skin disinfection. 
Contraindications: avoid regular or prolonged use in patients with thyroid 
disorders or those taking lithium; avoid regular use in neonates; avoid in 
very low-birth-weight infants. 

322 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



15. Disinfectants and antiseptics 

Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); broken 
skin (see below); renal impairment (Appendix 4).   

LARGE OPEN WOUNDS. The application of polyvidone iodine to large wounds or 
severe burns may produce systemic adverse effects such as metabolic acidosis, 
hypernatraemia, and impairment of renal function. 
Administration:  
Pre- and post-operative skin disinfection, ADULT and CHILD, apply undiluted 
solution to the skin area. 

Antiseptic (minor wounds and burns), ADULT and CHILD, apply undiluted 
solution to the affected area, twice daily (see also Precautions above).   

Adverse effects: irritation of skin and mucous membranes; may interfere with 
thyroid function tests; systemic effects (see under Precautions). 

15.2 Disinfectants 

A disinfectant is a chemical agent, which destroys or inhibits growth of 
pathogenic microorganisms in the non-sporing or vegetative state. 
Disinfectants do not necessarily kill all organisms but reduce them to a level 
that does not harm health or the quality of perishable goods. Disinfectants are 
applied to inanimate objects and materials such as instruments and surfaces to 
control and prevent infection. They may also be used to disinfect skin and 
other tissues prior to surgery (see also section 15.1, Antiseptics). 
Disinfection of water can be achieved by either physical or chemical means. 
Physical methods include boiling, filtration, and ultraviolet irradiation. 
Chemical methods include the use of chlorine-releasing compounds, such as 
sodium hypochlorite, tosylchloramide sodium (chloramine), halazone, or 
sodium dichloroisocyanurate. Where water is not disinfected at source it may 
be disinfected by boiling or by chemical means for drinking, cleaning teeth, 
and food preparation. 
Chlorine is a hazardous substance. It is highly corrosive in concentrated 
solution and splashes can cause burns and damage the eyes. Appropriate 
precautions must be taken when concentrated chlorine solutions or powders 
are handled. 
The chlorinated phenolic compound, chloroxylenol, is effective against a wide 
range of Gram-positive bacteria. It is less effective against staphylococci and 
Gram-negative bacteria; it is often ineffective against Pseudomonas spp. and it is 
inactive against spores. 
The aldehyde bactericidal disinfectant, glutaral, is rapidly effective against both 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. It is active against the tuberculosis 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 323 



15. Disinfectants and antiseptics 

bacillus, fungi such as Candida albicans, and viruses such as HIV and hepatitis B; 
it is slowly effective against bacterial spores. A 2% w/v aqueous alkaline 
glutaral solution (buffered to pH 8) can be used to sterilize heat-sensitive pre-
cleansed instruments and other equipment. 

Chlorine base compound 
Powder: (0.1% available chlorine) for solution. 

Chlorine-releasing compounds are representative disinfectants. Various agents can 
serve as alternatives. 

Uses: disinfection of surfaces, medical equipment, and water. 
Contraindications: avoid exposure of product to flame; activity diminished in 
presence of organic material and increasing pH (can cause release of toxic 
chlorine gas). 

Administration:  
Surface disinfection (minor contamination), apply 0.1% solution. 
Instrument disinfection, soak in (0.1%) solution for a minimum of 15 minutes 
(to avoid corrosion do not soak for more than 30 minutes); rinse with 
sterile water. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer's directions. 

Adverse effects: irritation and burning sensation on skin. 

Chloroxylenol 
Solution: 4.8%. 

Chloroxylenol is a representative disinfectant and antiseptic. Various agents can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: antiseptic; disinfection of instruments and surfaces. 
Precautions: aqueous solutions (which are susceptible to microbial 
contamination) should be freshly prepared; appropriate measures required 
to prevent contamination during storage or dilution. 

Administration:  
Antiseptic (wounds and other skin damage), apply a 1 in 20 dilution of 5% 
concentrate in water to the affected area. 

Disinfection of instruments, immerse a 1 in 20 dilution of 5% concentrate in 
alcohol (70%). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: skin sensitivity reported. 

324 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



15. Disinfectants and antiseptics 

Glutaral 
Solution: 2%. 

Uses: disinfection and sterilization of instruments and surfaces. 
Precautions: minimize occupational exposure (adequate skin protection and 
measures to avoid inhalation of vapour). 

Administration:  
Disinfection of clean instruments, immerse in undiluted solution for 10–
20 minutes; up to 3 hours may be required for certain instruments (for 
example, bronchoscopes with possible mycobacterial contamination); rinse 
with sterile water or alcohol after disinfection. 

Sterilization of clean instruments, immerse in undiluted solution for up to 
10 hours; rinse with sterile water or alcohol after disinfection. 

Adverse effects: (occupational exposure) nausea, headache, airway obstruction, 
asthma, rhinitis, eye irritation, dermatitis, and skin discoloration. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 325 



16. Diuretics 

 

 

 

SECTION 16:  
Diuretics 

326 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



16. Diuretics 

Diuretics increase urinary excretion of water and electrolytes, and are therefore 
used to relieve oedema associated with heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, or 
hepatic cirrhosis. Some diuretics are used at lower doses to reduce raised blood 
pressure. Osmotic diuretics are mainly used to treat cerebral oedema, and also 
to lower raised intraocular pressure.   
Most diuretics increase urine volume by inhibiting the reabsorption of sodium 
and chloride ions in the renal tubule; they also modify renal handling of 
potassium, calcium, magnesium, and urate. Osmotic diuretics act differently; 
they cause an increase in urine volume by an osmotic effect.   
Although loop diuretics are the most potent, their duration of action is 
relatively short; thiazide diuretics are moderately potent but produce diuresis 
for a longer period. Potassium-sparing diuretics have a relatively weak diuretic 
effect. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are weak diuretics and are rarely used for 
their diuretic effect but are principally used to lower intraocular pressure in 
glaucoma (section 21.4). 

Loop diuretics 

Loop diuretics, or high-ceiling diuretics, such as furosemide, rapidly produce 
an intense dose-dependent diuresis of relatively short duration. Oral 
furosemide produces diuresis within 30–60 minutes of administration, and a 
maximum diuretic effect in 1–2 hours. The diuretic action lasts for 4–6 hours. 
Intravenous furosemide produces diuresis within 5 minutes, and a maximum 
diuretic effect in 20–60 minutes; diuresis is complete within 2 hours.  
Loop diuretics inhibit reabsorption of sodium and chloride ions from the 
ascending loop of Henlé in the renal tubule and are useful, particularly in 
situations where rapid and effective diuresis is needed, for example, in acute 
pulmonary oedema due to left ventricular failure (see section 12.4). They are 
also used to treat oedema associated with renal and hepatic disorders and in 
high doses are used in the management of oliguria due to chronic renal 
insufficiency. Loop diuretics may be effective in patients who are unresponsive 
to thiazide diuretics. 
Because of their shorter duration of action, the risk of hypokalaemia may be less 
with loop diuretics than with thiazide diuretics; if required, a potassium-sparing 
diuretic may be given as an adjunct to prevent hypokalaemia. Loop diuretics 
may cause hypovolaemia and excessive use can produce severe dehydration with 
the possibility of circulatory collapse. Furosemide may cause hyperuricaemia and 
precipitate attacks of gout. Rapid high-dose injection or infusion of furosemide 
may cause tinnitus and even permanent deafness. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 327 



16. Diuretics 

Thiazide diuretics 

Thiazide diuretics, such as hydrochlorothiazide, are moderately potent and act 
by inhibiting sodium and chloride ion reabsorption at the beginning of the 
distal convoluted tubule. They produce diuresis within 1–2 hours of oral 
administration and most have a duration of action that lasts 12–24 hours.  
Thiazide diuretics are used in the management of oedema associated with mild 
to moderate congestive heart failure, renal dysfunction, or hepatic disease; 
however, thiazides are not effective in patients with poor renal function (i.e. a 
creatinine clearance of less than 30 ml per minute). In severe fluid retention, a 
loop diuretic may be necessary.  
In hypertension, a thiazide diuretic is used at a low dose to lower blood 
pressure with very little biochemical disturbance; the maximum therapeutic 
effect may not be seen for several weeks. Higher doses should not be used 
because they do not necessarily increase the hypotensive response but may 
cause marked changes in plasma potassium, sodium, magnesium, uric acid, 
glucose, and lipids. If a thiazide alone does not lower blood pressure 
adequately, it may be combined with another antihypertensive drug, such as a 
beta-adrenoceptor antagonist (section 12.3).  
Urinary excretion of calcium is reduced by thiazide diuretics and this property 
is occasionally of value in the treatment of idiopathic hypercalciuria in patients 
with calcium-containing calculi. Paradoxically, thiazide diuretics are used in the 
treatment of diabetes insipidus, since in this disease they reduce urine volume.  
Thiazide diuretics, especially in high doses, produce a marked increase in 
potassium excretion which may cause hypokalaemia; this is dangerous in patients 
with severe coronary artery disease and those being treated with cardiac 
glycosides. In hepatic failure, hypokalaemia can precipitate encephalopathy, 
particularly in alcoholic cirrhosis. Potassium-sparing diuretics are an effective 
alternative to potassium supplements for prevention of hypokalaemia induced 
by thiazide diuretics; however, supplementation with potassium in any form is 
seldom necessary with the smaller doses of diuretics used to treat hypertension. 

Potassium-sparing diuretics 

Potassium-sparing diuretics include amiloride and spironolactone; they are 
weak diuretics that reduce potassium excretion and increase sodium excretion 
in the distal tubule. Amiloride takes effect about 2 hours after oral 
administration, reaches its peak diuretic action in 6–10 hours, and persists for 
about 24 hours. Spironolactone, which acts by antagonizing aldosterone, has a 
relatively slow onset of action, requiring 2–3 days to achieve maximum diuretic 
effect and a similar period to cease its action after discontinuation of treatment. 

328 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



16. Diuretics 

Amiloride may be used alone; but its principal use is in combination with a 
thiazide or a loop diuretic to conserve potassium during treatment of 
congestive heart failure or hepatic cirrhosis with ascites. 
Spironolactone is used in the treatment of refractory oedema due to heart 
failure, hepatic cirrhosis (with or without ascites), nephrotic syndrome, and 
ascites associated with malignancy. It is frequently given with a thiazide or a 
loop diuretic, helping to conserve potassium in those at risk from hypokalaemia. 
A low dose of spironolactone is beneficial in severe heart failure in patients 
who are already taking an ACE inhibitor and a diuretic. Spironolactone is used 
in the diagnosis and treatment of primary hyperaldosteronism; presumptive 
evidence for diagnosis is provided by correction of hypokalaemia and of 
hypertension. 
The most dangerous adverse effect of potassium-sparing diuretics, such as 
amiloride or spironolactone, is hyperkalaemia, which can be life-threatening. 
These diuretics are thus best avoided, or used with extreme caution, in patients 
who have or may develop hyperkalaemia, such as those with renal failure, 
patients receiving other potassium-sparing diuretics, and patients taking ACE 
inhibitors or potassium supplements.   

Electrolyte imbalance 

The adverse effects of diuretic therapy are mainly due to the fluid and 
electrolyte imbalance induced by the drugs. Hyponatraemia is an adverse effect 
of all diuretics. The risk of hypokalaemia, which may occur with both thiazide 
and loop diuretics, depends more on the duration of action than on potency 
and is thus greater with thiazides than with loop diuretics (when given in 
equipotent doses). Potassium-sparing diuretics can cause hyperkalaemia. Other 
electrolyte disturbances include hypercalcaemia (thiazides), hypocalcaemia (loop 
diuretics), and hypomagnesaemia (thiazide and loop diuretics).   
Symptoms of fluid and electrolyte imbalance include dry mouth, thirst, 
gastrointestinal disturbances (including nausea and vomiting), weakness, 
lethargy, drowsiness, restlessness, seizures, confusion, headache, muscle pains 
or cramps, hypotension (including postural hypotension), oliguria, and 
arrhythmias.   

Elderly 

The elderly are more susceptible to electrolyte imbalance than younger patients. 
Treatment should begin with a lower initial dose of the diuretic (commonly 
about 50% of the full recommended adult dose) and then adjusted carefully 
according to renal function, plasma electrolytes, and diuretic response.

WHO Model Formulary 2008 329 



16. Diuretics 

Amiloride 
Tablet: 5 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: oedema associated with heart failure or hepatic cirrhosis (with ascites), 
usually in combination with thiazide or loop diuretic. 

Contraindications: hyperkalaemia; renal failure. 
Precautions: monitor electrolytes, particularly potassium; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); diabetes mellitus; the elderly (reduce dose); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Oedema (used alone), by mouth, ADULT, initially 10 mg daily in 1 or 2 divided 
doses, adjusted according to response (maximum, 20 mg daily). 

Oedema (in combination with a thiazide or a loop diuretic), by mouth, ADULT, 
initially 5 mg daily, increasing to 10 mg daily if necessary (maximum, 20 mg 
daily). 

Adverse effects: hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia (for other symptoms of fluid 
and electrolyte imbalance, see introductory notes above); diarrhoea, 
constipation, anorexia; paraesthesia, dizziness, minor psychiatric or visual 
disturbances; rash, pruritus; rise in blood urea nitrogen. 

Furosemide 
Injection: 10 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 40 mg. 

Furosemide is a representative loop diuretic. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: oedema; oliguria due to renal failure; heart failure (section 12.4).  
Contraindications: renal failure with anuria; precomatose states associated with 
liver cirrhosis.  

Precautions: monitor electrolytes, particularly potassium and sodium; 
hypotension; the elderly (reduce dose); pregnancy (Appendix 2); in oliguria, 
correct hypovolaemia before administration; renal impairment (Appendix 4), 
hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); prostatic enlargement; interactions: 
Appendix 1.  

Dose:  
Oedema, by mouth, ADULT, initially 40 mg daily on rising; usual maintenance 
dose, 20–40 mg daily; may be increased to 80 mg daily or more in resistant 
oedema; CHILD, 1–3 mg/kg daily (maximum, 40 mg daily). 

Acute pulmonary oedema, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 20–50 mg, 
increased incrementally in 20-mg steps every 2 hours, if necessary; if the 
effective single dose is more than 50 mg, consider using slow intravenous 

330 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



16. Diuretics 

infusion at a rate not exceeding 4 mg/minute; CHILD, 0.5–1.5 mg/kg daily 
(maximum, 20 mg daily) 

Oliguria (glomerular filtration rate less than 20 ml/minute), by slow intravenous 
infusion at a rate not exceeding 4 mg/minute, ADULT, initially 250 mg over 
1 hour; if urine output is not satisfactory during the hour after the first dose, 
infuse 500 mg over 2 hours then, if there is no satisfactory response during 
the hour after the second dose, infuse 1 g over 4 hours; if there is no 
response after the third dose, dialysis is probably necessary; the effective 
dose (up to 1 g) can be repeated every 24 hours.  

NOTE. Dose to be diluted in a suitable amount of infusion fluid, according to the 
hydration of the patient.  

Adverse effects: hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hyponatraemia, 
hypochloraemic alkalosis (for symptoms of fluid and electrolyte imbalance, 
see introductory notes), increased calcium excretion, hypovolaemia, 
hyperglycaemia (but less often than with thiazide diuretics); temporary 
increase in plasma cholesterol and triglyceride concentration; less 
commonly hyperuricaemia and gout; rarely rash, photosensitivity, bone 
marrow depression (withdraw treatment), pancreatitis (with large parenteral 
doses), tinnitus and deafness (with rapid administration of large parenteral 
doses and in renal impairment; deafness may be permanent if other ototoxic 
drugs taken). 

Hydrochlorothiazide 
Tablet (scored): 25 mg. 

Hydrochlorothiazide is a representative thiazide diuretic. Various medicines can serve 
as alternatives. 

Uses: oedema; diabetes insipidus; hypertension (section 12.3); heart failure 
(section 12.4). 

Contraindications: severe renal or severe hepatic impairment; hyponatraemia, 
hypercalcaemia, refractory hypokalaemia, symptomatic hyperuricaemia; 
Addison disease. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the elderly; 
electrolytes may need to be monitored with high doses or in renal 
impairment; may aggravate diabetes mellitus and gout; may exacerbate 
systemic lupus erythematosus; porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Hypertension, by mouth, ADULT, 12.5 mg daily, increased to 25–50 mg daily if 
necessary. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 331 



16. Diuretics 

Oedema, by mouth, ADULT, initially 25 mg daily on rising (reduce to 12.5 mg 
daily in the elderly), increased to 50 mg daily if necessary. 

Severe oedema in patients unable to tolerate loop diuretics, by mouth, ADULT, 
up to 100 mg either daily or on alternate days (maximum, 100 mg daily). 

Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, by mouth, ADULT, initially up to 100 mg daily. 
Adverse effects: hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hyponatraemia, 
hypochloraemic alkalosis (for symptoms of fluid and electrolyte imbalance 
see introductory notes); hypercalcaemia; hyperglycaemia; hyperuricaemia, 
gout; rash, photosensitivity; altered plasma lipid concentration; rarely 
impotence (reversible), blood disorders including neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia; pancreatitis, intrahepatic cholestasis; hypersensitivity 
reactions including pneumonitis, pulmonary oedema, and severe skin 
reactions; acute renal failure. 

Mannitol 
Injectable solution: 10%; 20%. 

Osmotic diuretics, such as mannitol, are administered in sufficiently large doses to 
raise the osmolarity of plasma and renal tubular fluid. Osmotic diuretics are used to 
reduce or prevent cerebral oedema, to reduce raised intraocular pressure, and to treat 
disequilibrium syndrome. Mannitol is also used to control intraocular pressure during 
acute attacks of glaucoma. Reduction of cerebrospinal and intraocular fluid pressure 
occurs within 15 minutes of the start of infusion and lasts for 3–8 hours after the 
infusion has been discontinued; diuresis occurs after 1–3 hours.  

Circulatory overload due to expansion of extracellular fluid is a serious adverse effect of 
mannitol; as a consequence, pulmonary oedema can be precipitated in patients with 
diminished cardiac reserve, and acute water intoxication may occur in patients with 
inadequate urine flow.  

Uses: cerebral oedema; raised intraocular pressure (emergency treatment or 
before surgery). 

Contraindications: pulmonary oedema; intracranial bleeding (except during 
craniotomy); severe congestive heart failure; metabolic oedema with 
abnormal capillary fragility; severe dehydration; renal failure (unless test 
dose produces diuresis). 

Precautions: monitor fluid and electrolyte balance; monitor renal function. 
Dose:  
Test dose (if patient is oliguric or if renal function is inadequate), by intravenous 
infusion as a 20% solution infused over 3–5 minutes, ADULT and CHILD, 
200 mg/kg; repeat test dose if urine output is less than 30–50 ml/hour; if 
response is inadequate after a second test dose, re-evaluate the patient. 

332 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



16. Diuretics 

Raised intracranial or intraocular pressure, by intravenous infusion as a 20% 
solution infused over 30–60 minutes, ADULT, 0.25–2 g/kg; CHILD,  
0.5–1.5 g/kg. 

Cerebral oedema, by intravenous infusion as a 20% solution infused rapidly, 
ADULT and CHILD, 1 g/kg. 

PHARMACEUTICAL PRECAUTIONS. Solutions containing more than mannitol, 
15%, may crystallize during storage. Crystals must be redissolved by warming solutions 
before use, and solutions must not be used if any crystals remain; intravenous 
administration sets must have a filter. Mannitol should not be administered with whole 
blood or passed through the same transfusion set as blood. 

Adverse effects: fluid and electrolyte imbalance (for symptoms, see 
introductory notes above); circulatory overload, acidosis; pulmonary 
oedema (particularly in diminished cardiac reserve); chills, fever, chest pain, 
dizziness, visual disturbances; hypotension or hypertension; urticaria, 
hypersensitivity reactions; extravasation may cause oedema, skin necrosis, 
and thrombophlebitis; rarely acute renal failure (with large doses). 

Spironolactone 
Tablet: 25 mg. 

Uses: refractory oedema in congestive heart failure; adjunct to ACE inhibitor 
and a loop or thiazide diuretic in severe congestive heart failure (see section 
12.4); nephrotic syndrome; hepatic cirrhosis with ascites and oedema; 
ascites associated with malignancy; primary hyperaldosteronism. 

Contraindications: hyperkalaemia; hyponatraemia; moderate renal impairment; 
Addison disease. 

Precautions: monitor blood urea nitrogen and plasma electrolytes (discontinue 
if hyperkalaemia); the elderly (reduce dose); diabetes mellitus; renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); porphyria; high doses 
carcinogenic in rodents; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Oedema, by mouth, ADULT, 100–200 mg daily, increased if necessary to 400 mg 
daily in resistant oedema; usual maintenance dose, 25–200 mg daily; CHILD, 
initially 1–3 mg/kg daily in 1–2 divided doses. 

Primary hyperaldosteronism, by mouth, ADULT, diagnosis, 400 mg daily for  
3–4 weeks (see note above). 

Preoperative management, 100–400 mg daily; if not suitable for surgery, give 
lowest effective dose for long-term maintenance. 

Adjunct in severe heart failure, by mouth, ADULT, usually 25 mg daily. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 333 



16. Diuretics 

Adverse effects: hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia, hyperchloraemic acidosis, 
dehydration (for symptoms of fluid and electrolyte imbalance, see 
introductory notes above); transient increase in blood urea nitrogen; 
diarrhoea; gynaecomastia, menstrual irregularities; impotence, hirsutism, 
deepening of voice; rash, ataxia, fever, hepatotoxicity. 

334 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

 

 

 

SECTION 17:  
Gastrointestinal medicines 

17.1 Antacids and other antiulcer medicines 336 

17.2 Antiemetic medicines 341 

17.3 Anti-inflammatory medicines 344 

17.4 Laxatives 347 

17.5 Medicines used in diarrhoea 348 

17.5.1   Oral rehydration 349 

17.5.2   Medicines for diarrhoea in children 351 

17.5.3  Antidiarrhoeal (symptomatic) medicines in 
adults 351 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 335 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

17.1 Antacids and other antiulcer medicines 

Antacids (which usually contain aluminium or magnesium compounds) can 
often relieve symptoms in ulcer dyspepsia and in non-erosive gastro-
oesophageal reflux; they are also sometimes used in functional (non-ulcer) 
dyspepsia but the evidence of benefit is uncertain. Antacids are best given 
when symptoms occur or are expected, usually between meals and at bedtime, 
4 or more times daily; additional doses may be required up to once an hour. 
Conventional doses, for example, 10 ml 3 or 4 times daily of liquid 
magnesium–aluminium antacids promote ulcer healing, but less well than 
antisecretory drugs (such as an H2-receptor antagonist); proof of a relationship 
between healing and neutralizing capacity is lacking. Liquid preparations are 
more effective than solids. 
Aluminium- and magnesium-containing antacids (for example aluminium 
hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide), being relatively insoluble in water, are 
long-acting if retained in the stomach. They are suitable antacids for most 
purposes. Magnesium-containing antacids have a laxative effect whereas 
aluminium-containing antacids may be constipating. 

H2-receptor antagonists (for example ranitidine) heal gastric and duodenal 
ulcers by reducing the secretion of gastric acid as a result of histamine H2-
receptor blockade; they can also relieve gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. 
High doses of H2-receptor antagonists have been used in Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome, but a proton-pump inhibitor is now preferred. 

Maintenance treatment with low doses of H2-receptor antagonists has largely 
been replaced in Helicobacter pylori-positive patients by eradication regimens (see 
below). Maintenance treatment may occasionally be used for those with 
frequent severe recurrences and for the elderly who suffer ulcer complications. 

Treatment of undiagnosed dyspepsia with H2-receptor antagonists may be 
acceptable in younger patients but care is required in older people because 
their symptoms may be caused by gastric cancer. 

H2-receptor antagonist therapy can promote healing of NSAIM-associated 
ulcers (particularly duodenal). Treatment also reduces the risk of acid 
aspiration in obstetric patients at delivery (Mendelson syndrome). 

Peptic ulcer 
Peptic ulceration involves the stomach, duodenum, and lower oesophagus. 
General and inexpensive measures, such as introducing a healthy lifestyle, 
stopping smoking, and taking antacids, can promote healing, but relapse is 
common. The possibility of malignant disease should be considered in all 
patients over the age of 40 years who are suspected of having an ulcer. 

336 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Gastric and duodenal ulcers are healed by 4–8 weeks treatment with  
H2-receptor antagonists but there is a high rate of relapse (greater than 70% 
over 2 years) requiring maintenance therapy. Relapses can be prevented very 
successfully by eradicating Helicobacter pylori which is causally associated with 
most peptic ulcers (except those related to NSAIM use). Eradication of 
H. pylori reduces the relapse rate to about 4–8%. This is undoubtedly a cost-
effective option when compared with the alternatives of long-term 
maintenance therapy with low-dose H2-receptor antagonists or repeated 
treatment of recurrent ulcers. It is recommended that the presence of H. pylori 
is confirmed before starting eradication treatment, particularly for gastric 
ulcers. The urea breath test is used widely to test for H. pylori, but false 
negative results may occur if used soon after administration of either a proton 
pump inhibitor or an antibacterial. Eradication regimens are based on a 
combination of an acid-reducing (“antisecretory”) drug and antibacterials. 
The following model eradication regimen is suggested on the basis of its 
efficacy and simplicity (doses suitable for adults are shown): 

omeprazole 40 mg daily for 1 week 
plus 
metronidazole 400 mg three times daily for 1 week 
plus 
amoxicillin 500 mg three times daily for 1 week 

The decision on choosing an eradication regimen for a particular country 
should take into account local resistance to antibacterials, as well as the cost 
and availability of the necessary drugs. 

NSAIM-associated ulcerss 
Gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration may occur with NSAIM use. To avoid 
this, use of the NSAIM should be stopped but this is not always possible. A 
proton pump inhibitor or an H2-receptor antagonist at twice the usual dose 
may be considered for protection against NSAIM-associated gastric and 
duodenal ulcers. 
Patients who must continue NSAIM therapy after ulcer development may take 
high-dose H2-receptor antagonists concomitantly, but ulcers tend to heal more 
slowly with H2-receptor antagonists if NSAIMs are continued. A proton pump 
inhibitor, such as omeprazole [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], is 
more effective but more expensive. 
In patients who can discontinue NSAIM therapy after ulcer development, 
treatment with an H2-receptor antagonist is effective, but a treatment period of 
up to 8 weeks may be necessary. A proton pump inhibitor usually produces the 
most rapid healing. After healing, continued prophylaxis is required. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 337 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Dyspepsia 
Dyspepsia covers pain, fullness, early satiety, bloating, and nausea. It can occur 
with gastric and duodenal ulceration and gastric cancer, but most commonly it 
is of uncertain origin. 
Patients with non-ulcer dyspepsia should be advised to avoid smoking, alcohol, 
and aggravating foods, and to eat small regular meals to aid digestion. Non-
ulcer dyspepsia tends to be self-limiting but antacids and H2-receptor 
antagonists are often used to suppress gastric acid; Helicobacter pylori eradication 
does not improve symptoms in cases of non-ulcer dyspepsia. 
Prompt investigation is important in the presence of severe symptoms such as 
bleeding, dysphagia, or weight loss. 

Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (including non-erosive gastro-oesophageal 
reflux and erosive oesophagitis) is associated with a range of symptoms which 
include heartburn, acid regurgitation, and sometimes difficulty in swallowing 
(dysphagia); oesophageal inflammation (oesophagitis), ulceration, and stricture 
formation may occur and there is an association with asthma. 
The management of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease includes drug treatment, 
lifestyle changes and, in some cases, surgery. Initial treatment is guided by the 
severity of symptoms; treatment is then adjusted according to response. 
For mild symptoms of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, initial management 
may include the use of antacids. H2-receptor antagonists suppress acid 
secretion and they may relieve symptoms and permit reduction in antacid 
consumption. For refractory cases, and in patients with severe symptoms or 
proven or severe pathology (for example, Barrett oesophagus), a short course 
of a proton pump inhibitor is needed initially. 

Zollinger–Ellison syndrome 

Management of Zollinger–Ellison syndrome requires high-dose H2-receptor 
antagonist treatment. Although proton pump inhibitors are more effective 
than the H2-receptor antagonists, particularly for cases resistant to other 
treatments, they are more expensive. 

Aluminium hydroxide 
Oral liquid: 320 mg/5 ml. 
Tablet: 500 mg. 

Uses: ulcer and non-ulcer dyspepsia; gastro-oesophageal reflux disease; 
hyperphosphataemia. 

338 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Contraindications: hypophosphataemia; undiagnosed gastrointestinal or rectal 
bleeding; appendicitis; porphyria. 

Precautions: impaired renal function and renal dialysis (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); constipation; dehydration; fluid restriction; 
gastrointestinal disorders associated with decreased bowel motility or 
obstruction; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Dyspepsia, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, by mouth, ADULT, 1–2 tablets 
chewed 4 times daily and at bedtime or 5–10 ml suspension 4 times daily, 
between meals and at bedtime; CHILD 6–12 years, 5 ml up to 3 times daily. 

Hyperphosphataemia, by mouth, ADULT, 2–10 g daily in divided doses with 
meals. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Do not take other medicines within 2–4 hours of aluminium 
hydroxide preparations. May be taken with water to reduce constipating effects. 

Adverse effects: constipation; intestinal obstruction (with large doses); 
hypophosphataemia with increased bone resorption, hypercalciuria, and 
increased risk of osteomalacia (more common in patients on a low 
phosphate diet or on prolonged therapy); hyperaluminaemia resulting in 
osteomalacia, encephalopathy, dementia, and microcytic anaemia (in 
chronic renal failure treated with aluminium hydroxide as phosphate-
binding agent). 

Magnesium hydroxide 
Oral liquid: equivalent to 550 mg magnesium oxide/10 ml. 

Uses: ulcer and non-ulcer dyspepsia; gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. 
Contraindications: severe renal impairment. 
Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 

interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  

Dyspepsia, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, by mouth, ADULT, 5–10 ml 
repeated according to patient’s needs. 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea; hypermagnesaemia resulting in loss of deep tendon 
reflexes and respiratory depression, along with other symptoms including 
nausea, vomiting, flushing of skin, thirst, hypotension, drowsiness, 
confusion, muscle weakness, bradycardia, coma, and cardiac arrest (in renal 
impairment). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 339 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Ranitidine 
Injection: 25 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Oral liquid: 75 mg/5 ml. 
Tablet: 150 mg (as hydrochloride). 

Ranitidine is a representative H2-receptor antagonist. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: benign gastric and duodenal ulceration, gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease, Zollinger–Ellison syndrome; other conditions where gastric acid 
reduction is beneficial. 

Contraindications: porphyria. 
Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); middle-aged or 
older patients and those whose symptoms change (may mask symptoms of 
gastric cancer); interactions: Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Benign gastric and duodenal ulceration, by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg twice daily or 
300 mg at night for 4–8 weeks (up to 6 weeks in chronic episodic dyspepsia 
and up to 8 weeks in NSAIM-associated ulceration; in NSAIM-associated 
duodenal ulceration, 300 mg can be given twice daily for 4 weeks to achieve 
a higher healing rate); CHILD (peptic ulcer), 2–4 mg/kg twice daily 
(maximum, 300 mg daily). 

Benign gastric and duodenal ulceration, reflux oesophagitis, Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome,  
by intramuscular injection, ADULT, 50 mg every 6–8 hours;  
by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 50 mg diluted to 20 ml and given over at 
least 2 minutes (may be repeated every 6–8 hours);  
by intravenous infusion, ADULT, 25 mg/hour for 2 hours (may be repeated 
every 6–8 hours). 

Duodenal ulceration associated with H. pylori, see note above. 
Prophylaxis of NSAIM-induced gastric or duodenal ulcer, by mouth, ADULT, 
300 mg twice daily. 

Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg twice daily or 
300 mg at night for up to 8 weeks, or if necessary, 12 weeks, increased in 
moderate to severe disease to 600 mg daily in 2–4 divided doses for up to 
12 weeks.  

Long-term treatment of healed gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, by mouth, 
ADULT, 150 mg twice daily. 

Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg 3 times daily; up to 6 g 
daily in divided doses has been used. 

340 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Gastric acid reduction (prophylaxis of acid aspiration) in obstetrics, by mouth, 
ADULT, 150 mg at onset of labour, then every 6 hours.  

Surgical procedures, by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 50 mg 
45–60 minutes before induction of anaesthesia (intravenous injection 
diluted to 20 ml and given over at least 2 minutes); by mouth, ADULT, 150 mg 
2 hours before induction of anaesthesia, and also, when possible, on the 
preceding evening. 

Prophylaxis of stress ulceration, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, initially 
50 mg diluted to 20 ml and given over at least 2 minutes, then 125–250 
micrograms/kg per hour by continuous intravenous infusion (may be followed by 
150 mg twice daily by mouth when oral feeding commences). 

Adverse effects: diarrhoea and other gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, 
dizziness, rash, tiredness, acute pancreatitis, bradycardia, atrioventricular 
block, confusion, depression; rarely hallucinations (particularly in the elderly 
or the very ill), hypersensitivity reactions (including fever, arthralgia, myalgia, 
and anaphylaxis), blood disorders (including agranulocytosis, leukopenia, 
pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia), hepatitis, tachycardia, agitation, 
visual disturbances, erythema multiforme, alopecia, gynaecomastia, and 
impotence; very rarely interstitial nephritis. 

17.2 Antiemetic medicines 

Metoclopramide has antiemetic properties and also stimulates upper 
gastrointestinal motility. Metoclopramide is effective against nausea and 
vomiting associated with gastrointestinal disorders or migraine, and following 
surgery and chemotherapy; is also effective against radiation-induced nausea 
and vomiting. Combining metoclopramide with corticosteroids (such as 
dexamethasone) can improve its antiemetic effect in chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and vomiting (see also section 8.2). Metoclopramide may be useful in 
the management of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (section 17.1) and 
gastroparesis, as well as preoperatively in the prevention of aspiration 
syndromes. It is also used to facilitate intubation of the small bowel during 
radiographic examinations. Metoclopramide is not effective in the prevention 
or treatment of motion sickness. 
Metoclopramide may cause acute dystonic reactions with facial and skeletal 
muscle spasms and oculogyric crises. These reactions are most common in the 
young (especially girls and young women) and the elderly; they occur shortly 
after the start of treatment and subside within 24 hours of drug withdrawal. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 341 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Promethazine is a phenothiazine that in addition to D2 dopaminergic blockade 
has pronounced histamine H1 and muscarinic receptor blocking properties. It 
is effective in the prevention and treatment of vertigo and motion sickness. 
Promethazine may be useful in the prevention and treatment of postoperative 
and drug-induced nausea and vomiting. It has limited effect on chemotherapy-
induced mild to moderate emesis. 

Metoclopramide 
Injection: 5 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 10 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: nausea and vomiting in gastrointestinal disorders, in migraine 
(section 7.1), and following surgery and treatment with cytotoxics 
(section 8.2) or radiotherapy; gastro–oesophageal reflux disease 
(section 17.1); premedication; aid to gastrointestinal intubation; 
gastroparesis. 

NOTE. In children (and in some countries, patients under 20 years) use is restricted to 
treatment of severe intractable vomiting of known cause, management of radio- and 
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, as an aid to gastrointestinal intubation, 
and as premedication. 

Contraindications: gastrointestinal obstruction, haemorrhage or perforation; 
3–4 days after gastrointestinal surgery; convulsive disorders; 
phaeochromocytoma. 

Precautions: the elderly, children and young adults; hepatic impairment 
(Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); may mask underlying 
disorders such as cerebral irritation; avoid for 3–4 days after gastrointestinal 
surgery; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); Parkinson 
disease; epilepsy; depression; porphyria; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Nausea and vomiting, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, gastroparesis, by mouth, 
by intramuscular injection, or by slow intravenous injection (over 1–2 minutes), 
ADULT, 10 mg 3 times daily; YOUNG ADULT 15–19 years (under 60 kg), 5 mg 
3 times daily; CHILD up to 1 year (up to 10 kg), 1 mg twice daily; CHILD  
1–3 years (10–14 kg), 1 mg 2–3 times daily; CHILD 3–5 years (15–19 kg), 
2 mg 2–3 times daily; CHILD 5–9 years (20–29 kg), 2.5 mg 3 times daily; 
CHILD 9–14 years (30 kg and over), 5 mg 3 times daily (usual maximum 
500 micrograms/kg daily, particularly for children and young adults). 

Premedication, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 10 mg as a single dose. 
Aid to gastrointestinal intubation, by mouth, by intramuscular injection, or by slow 
intravenous injection, ADULT, 10–20 mg as a single dose 5–10 minutes before 
examination; YOUNG ADULT (15–19 years), 10 mg; CHILD under 3 years, 

342 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

1 mg; CHILD 3–5 years, 2 mg; CHILD 5–9 years, 2.5 mg; CHILD 9–14 years, 
5 mg. 

NOTE. High dose metoclopramide with cytotoxic chemotherapy, see section 8.2. 

Adverse effects: extrapyramidal symptoms (especially in children and young 
adults; see introductory note above); tardive dyskinesias on prolonged use; 
hyperprolactinaemia; drowsiness, restlessness, dizziness, headache, 
diarrhoea, depression, hypotension and hypertension reported; rarely 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome; rash, pruritus, oedema; cardiac conduction 
abnormalities following intravenous administration; rarely 
methaemoglobinaemia (more severe in G6PD deficiency). 

Promethazine 
Injection: 25 mg (hydrochloride)/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Oral liquid: 5 mg (hydrochloride)/5 ml. 
Tablet: 10 mg; 25 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: management of postoperative and drug-induced nausea and vomiting; 
labyrinthine disorders, motion sickness; premedication (section 1.3). 

Contraindications: porphyria; child under 2 years (risk of respiratory 
depression). 

Precautions: prostatic hypertrophy; urinary retention; glaucoma; 
pyloroduodenal obstruction; hepatic disease (Appendix 5); epilepsy; the 
elderly and children (more susceptible to adverse effects); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Nausea and vomiting, by mouth, ADULT, 25 mg at night, increased to 50–75 mg 
at night or 25 mg 2–3 times daily if necessary (maximum, 100 mg in 
24 hours). 

Nausea and vomiting, by deep intramuscular injection or by slow intravenous injection 
(diluted to 2.5 mg/ml in water for injection), ADULT, 12.5–25 mg, repeated 
at intervals of not less than 4 hours (usual maximum, 100 mg in 24 hours). 

Prevention of motion sickness, by mouth, ADULT, 20–25 mg at bedtime on night 
before travel, repeated on the morning of travel if necessary; CHILD  
2–5 years, 5 mg at bedtime on night before travel and also on morning of 
travel if necessary; CHILD 5–10 years, 10 mg at bedtime on night before 
travel and also on morning of travel if necessary. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 343 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Adverse effects: drowsiness, dizziness, sedation (paradoxical stimulation may 
occur, especially with high doses or in children and the elderly); headache, 
nightmares, confusion, psychomotor impairment; urinary retention, dry 
mouth, blurred vision, gastrointestinal disturbances; extrapyramidal effects; 
hypersensitivity reactions; rash, photosensitivity reactions; jaundice; blood 
disorders; cardiovascular adverse effects (after injection); venous 
thrombosis at site of intravenous injection; pain on intramuscular injection. 

17.3 Anti-inflammatory medicines 

Ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease are chronic inflammatory diseases of the 
intestinal tract. Effective management requires drug therapy, attention to 
nutrition, and in severe or chronic active disease, surgery. 

Treatment of acute attacks of ulcerative colitis and Crohn 
disease 
Acute attacks of mild to moderate severity affecting the rectum (proctitis) or 
the rectosigmoid (distal colitis) require local treatment with a corticosteroid 
(such as hydrocortisone) or an aminosalicylate (such as sulfasalazine). More 
extensive disease, or disease that is not responsive to local treatment, requires 
oral therapy; an oral aminosalicylate alone can sometimes be used in mild 
disease affecting the colon but addition of an oral corticosteroid for 4–8 weeks 
is usually necessary. Because of the risk of intestinal perforation, rectal forms 
of hydrocortisone must be used with extreme caution in patients with severe 
ulcerative disease and should not be given to such patients without conducting 
a thorough proctological examination. 
Severe extensive or fulminant disease needs hospital admission and 
intravenous corticosteroid administration; other therapy may include 
intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement, blood transfusion, and possibly 
parenteral nutrition and antibacterials. 
Metronidazole (section 6.2.2) may be beneficial in the treatment of active 
Crohn disease particularly with perianal involvement, possibly through its 
antibacterial activity. Other antibacterials should be given if specifically 
indicated (for example, in sepsis associated with fistulas and perianal disease) 
and for managing bacterial overgrowth in the small bowel. 
Immunosuppressant drugs can be useful in patients with chronically active 
disease, particularly in patients unresponsive to corticosteroids or those with 
corticosteroid-dependent disease. Methotrexate (section 2.4) is sometimes used 
to treat Crohn disease unresponsive to other immunosuppressants. 

344 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Maintenance of remission 

Sulfasalazine is most effective in the maintanance of remission of ulcerative 
colitis, but it is not so useful in Crohn disease. Corticosteroids are not suitable 
for maintenance of remission because of their adverse effects. In resistant or 
frequently relapsing cases of inflammatory bowel disease, azathioprine,  
2–2.5 mg/kg daily (section 8.1), or mercaptopurine, 1–1.5 mg/kg daily 
(section 8.2) given under close supervision may be helpful. Methotrexate, 
15 mg weekly, is sometimes used to maintain remission in Crohn disease. 

Additional treatments 

Laxatives are required to facilitate bowel movement when proctitis is present. 
Antimotility drugs (such as codeine; section 17.5.3) and antispasmodic drugs 
should not be used in active ulcerative colitis because they can precipitate 
paralytic ileus and megacolon. Diarrhoea resulting from reduced bile salt 
absorption may improve with colestyramine [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List]. General nutritional care and appropriate supplements are essential. 
High-fibre or low-residue diets should be used as appropriate. Irritable bowel 
syndrome during remission of ulcerative colitis requires avoidance of a high-
fibre diet and possibly treatment with an antispasmodic. 

Hydrocortisone 
Retention enema. 
Suppository: 25 mg (acetate). 

Hydrocortisone retention enema is a representative rectal corticosteroid preparation 
(excluding suppositories). Various formulations can serve as alternatives. 

Hydrocortisone rectal preparations are complementary list medicines. 

Uses: ulcerative colitis, proctitis, proctosigmoiditis; anaphylaxis (section 3); 
inflammatory skin conditions (section 13.3); adrenocortical insufficiency 
(section 18.1). 

Contraindications: bowel obstruction, bowel perforation, or extensive fistulas 
(enemas); untreated infections. 

Precautions: proctological examination required before treatment; systemic 
absorption may occur (see section 18.1); prolonged use should be avoided; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Ulcerative colitis, proctitis, by rectum (suppositories), ADULT, 25 mg twice daily 
for 2 weeks; may be increased to 25 mg 3 times daily or 50 mg twice daily in 
severe cases; in factitial proctitis treatment may be required for 6–8 weeks. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 345 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Ulcerative colitis, ulcerative proctitis, ulcerative proctosigmoiditis, by rectum 
(retention enema), ADULT, 100 mg at night for 21 days or until clinical and 
proctological remission; if there is no clinical and proctological 
improvement after 21 days, discontinue; treatment for 2–3 months may be 
required for proctological remission; when used for more than 21 days, 
discontinue gradually using 100 mg every other night for 2–3 weeks. 

Adverse effects: local pain or burning sensation; rectal bleeding reported (with 
use of enema); exacerbation of untreated infections; suppositories may stain 
fabrics; for adverse effects associated with long-term corticosteroid 
treatment, see section 18.1. 

Sulfasalazine 
Retention enema. 
Suppository: 500 mg. 
Tablet: 500 mg. 

Sulfasalazine is a representative aminosalicylate. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: ulcerative colitis; Crohn disease; severe rheumatoid arthritis (section 2.4). 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to salicylates or sulfonamides; child under 
2 years; porphyria; intestinal or urinary obstruction; severe renal impairment. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
G6PD deficiency; slow acetylator status; monitor blood counts and liver 
function initially and at monthly intervals for first 3 months of treatment; 
monitor kidney function initially and at intervals during treatment; history 
of allergy; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

BLOOD DISORDERS. Patients should be advised to report any unexplained bleeding, 
bruising, purpura, sore throat, fever or malaise occurring during treatment; blood count 
should be performed and sulfasalazine stopped immediately if there is suspicion or 
evidence of blood disorder. 
Dose:  
Ulcerative colitis, by mouth, ADULT, 1–2 g 4 times daily in acute attack until 
remission, reducing to a maintenance dose of 500 mg 4 times daily; CHILD 
over 2 years, 40–60 mg/kg daily in acute attack, reducing to a maintenance 
dose of 20–30 mg/kg daily. 

Active Crohn disease, by mouth, ADULT, 1–2 g 4 times daily in acute attack until 
remission occurs; CHILD over 2 years, 40–60 mg/kg daily in acute attack 
until remission occurs. 

Ulcerative colitis, Crohn colitis, by rectum (suppositories, used alone or in 
conjunction with oral therapy), ADULT, 0.5–1 g morning and evening after a 

346 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

bowel movement; by rectum (retention enema), ADULT, 3 g at night retained 
for at least an hour; CHILD, not a suitable formulation. 

Adverse effects: nausea, headache, exacerbation of colitis; diarrhoea, loss of 
appetite, fever, blood disorders (including Heinz body anaemia, 
megaloblastic anaemia, leukopenia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia); 
hypersensitivity reactions (including rash, urticaria, Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (erythema multiforme), exfoliative dermatitis, epidermal 
necrolysis, pruritus, photosensitization, anaphylaxis, serum sickness, 
interstitial nephritis, and lupus erythematosus-like syndrome); lung 
complications (including eosinophilia and fibrosing alveolitis); ocular 
complications (including periorbital oedema); stomatitis, parotitis; ataxia, 
aseptic meningitis, vertigo, tinnitus, alopecia, peripheral neuropathy, 
insomnia, depression, hallucinations; renal effects (including proteinuria, 
crystalluria, and haematuria); oligospermia; rarely acute pancreatitis, 
hepatitis; urine may be coloured orange; some soft contact lenses may be 
stained. 

17.4 Laxatives 

A balanced diet, including adequate fluid intake and fibre, is of value in 
preventing constipation. 
Before prescribing laxatives, it is important to be sure that the patient is 
constipated and that the constipation is not secondary to an underlying 
undiagnosed complaint. It is also important that the patient understands that 
bowel habit can vary considerably in frequency without doing harm. For 
example, some people consider themselves constipated if they do not have a 
bowel movement each day. A useful definition of constipation is the passage 
of hard stools less frequently than the patient’s own normal pattern; this 
should be explained to the patient since misconceptions about bowel habits 
have led to excessive laxative use, which in turn has led to hypokalaemia. 
Laxatives should generally be avoided except where straining will exacerbate a 
condition such as angina or increase the risk of rectal bleeding, as in 
haemorrhoids. Laxatives are of value in drug-induced constipation, for the 
expulsion of parasites after anthelminthic treatment (section 6.1) and to clear 
the alimentary tract before surgery and radiological procedures. Prolonged 
treatment of constipation is sometimes necessary. 
There are many different laxatives. These include bulk-forming laxatives which 
relieve constipation by increasing faecal mass and stimulating peristalsis, 
stimulant laxatives (such as senna) which increase intestinal motility and often 
cause abdominal cramp, faecal softeners which lubricate and soften impacted 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 347 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

faeces and osmotic laxatives which act by retaining fluid in the bowel by 
osmosis. Bowel cleansing solutions are used before colonic surgery, 
colonoscopy, or radiological examination to ensure that the bowel is free of 
solid contents; they are not a treatment for constipation. 

Senna 
Tablet: 7.5 mg (sennosides)(or traditional dosage forms) 

Senna is a representative stimulant laxative. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: constipation (acts in 8–12 hours). 
Contraindications: intestinal obstruction; undiagnosed abdominal symptoms 
Precautions: avoid prolonged use unless indication for prevention of faecal 
impaction; breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Dose:  
Constipation, by mouth, ADULT, 2–4 tablets, usually at night; initial dose should 
be low, then gradually increased; CHILD over 6 years, half the adult dose in 
the morning (on doctor’s advice). 

Adverse effects: abdominal discomfort; hypokalaemia (with prolonged use or 
overdosage). 

17.5 Medicines used in diarrhoea 

Acute diarrhoeal diseases are a leading cause of childhood morbidity and 
mortality; frail and elderly patients are also at risk. In adults acute diarrhoea is 
the most frequent health problem of travellers to developing countries and is 
increasingly common among HIV-infected persons. Assessment and 
correction of dehydration and electrolyte disturbance is the priority in all cases 
of acute diarrhoea. Symptomatic relief (section 17.5.3) in adults may be 
warranted in some cases but antidiarrhoeals should never be used in children 
since they do not reduce fluid and electrolyte loss and may cause adverse 
effects. 
Diarrhoea persisting for longer than a month is known as chronic diarrhoea. A 
mild malabsorption syndrome, tropical enteropathy, is apparent in most 
healthy indigenous populations of tropical countries. However the majority of 
cases of chronic diarrhoea have non-infectious causes including gluten-
sensitivity, inherited metabolic disorders or inflammatory bowel disease. 
Bloody diarrhoea is usually a sign of invasive enteric infection and should be 
treated with an appropriate anti-infective agent (section 6).  

348 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

17.5.1 Oral rehydration 

Replacement of fluid and electrolytes orally can be achieved by giving oral 
rehydration salts (solutions containing sodium, potassium, citrate, and 
glucose). Acute diarrhoea in children should always be treated with oral 
rehydration solution, according to plans A, B, or C as detailed below. 

Treatment of dehydration in children: WHO recommendations  

According to the degree of dehydration in diarrhoea, health professionals are 
advised to follow one of three management plans:  

Plan A: no dehydration. Nutritional advice, increased fluid intake (in the form 
of soup, rice, water and yoghurt, or even just water), and zinc 
supplementation (section 17.5.2) at home are usually sufficient. However, for 
infants aged under 6 months who have not yet started taking solids, oral 
rehydration solution must be presented before offering milk. Mother’s milk 
or dried cow’s milk must be given without any particular restrictions. In the 
case of mixed breast-milk/formula feeding, the contribution of breastfeeding 
should be increased. Parents should be informed about the circumstances in 
which they should seek further advice.  

Plan B: moderate dehydration. Whatever the child’s age, a 4-hour treatment 
plan is used to avoid short-term problems. It is recommended that parents 
are shown how to give approximately 75 ml/kg of oral rehydration solution 
(in small amounts and at regular intervals) over a 4-hour period. It is 
suggested that parents should be observed to see how they cope at the 
beginning of the treatment. A larger amount of solution can be given if the 
child continues to have frequent stools. In the event of vomiting, rehydration 
must be discontinued for 10 minutes and then resumed at a slower rate. In 
young children breastfeeding should be continued on demand; older children 
should receive milk and nutritious food as normal after completing the 
4 hours of oral rehydration. The child’s status must be reassessed after 4 
hours to decide on the most appropriate subsequent treatment. Zinc 
supplementation (section 17.5.2) should begin as soon as the child can eat 
and has completed 4 hours of oral rehydration. Oral rehydration solution 
should continue to be offered once dehydration has been controlled, for as 
long as the child continues to have diarrhoea.  

Plan C: severe dehydration. Hospitalization is necessary, but the most urgent 
priority is to start rehydration. In hospital (or elsewhere), if the child can 
drink, oral rehydration solution must be given pending, and even during, 
intravenous infusion (20 ml/kg every hour by mouth before infusion, then 
5 ml/kg every hour by mouth during intravenous rehydration). For 
intravenous supplementation, it is recommended that a compound solution 
of sodium lactate (or, if this is unavailable, sodium chloride, 0.9% solution) 
(section 26.2) is administered at a rate adapted to the child’s age (infant under 
12 months; 30 ml/kg over 1 hour then 70 ml/kg over 5 hours; child over 
12 months; 30 ml/kg over 30 minutes then 70 ml/kg over 2.5 hours). If the 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 349 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

intravenous route is unavailable, a nasogastric tube is also suitable for 
administering oral rehydration solution at a rate of 20 ml/kg every hour for 
6 hours. If the child vomits, the rate of administration of the oral solution 
should be reduced. Reassess the child's status after 3 hours (6 hours for 
infants) and continue treatment as appropriate with plan A, B, or C. 

Oral rehydration salts 
Glucose: 75 mEq sodium: 75 mEq or mmol/l chloride: 65 mEq or 
mmol/l potassium: 20 mEq or mmol/l citrate: 10 mmol/l osmolarity: 
245 mOsm/l glucose: 13.5 g/l sodium chloride: 2.6 g/l potassium 
chloride: 1.5 g/l trisodium citrate dihydrate+: 2.9 g/l. 
+  trisodium citrate dihydrate may be replaced by sodium hydrogen carbonate 

(sodium bicarbonate) 2.5 g/L. However, as the stability of this latter formulation 
is very poor under tropical conditions, it is only recommended when 
manufactured for immediate use. 

Glucose salt solution 
  

sodium chloride 2.6 g/litre of clean water 

sodium citrate [dihydrate] 2.9 g/litre of clean water 

potassium chloride 1.5 g/litre of clean water 

glucose (anhydrous) 13.5 g/litre of clean water 

  
When glucose and sodium citrate are not available, they may be replaced by  
  

sucrose (common sugar) 27 g/litre of clean water 

sodium bicarbonate 2.5 g/litre of clean water 

  
NOTE. The solution may be prepared either from prepackaged sugar/salt mixtures or 
from bulk substances and water. Solutions must be freshly prepared, preferably with 
recently boiled and cooled water. Accurate weighing and thorough mixing and 
dissolution of ingredients in the correct volume of clean water is important. 
Administration of more concentrated solutions can result in hypernatraemia. 

Uses: dehydration from acute diarrhoea. 
Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4). 
Dose:  
Fluid and electrolyte loss in acute diarrhoea, by mouth, ADULT, 200–400 ml 
solution after every loose motion; INFANT and CHILD, according to Plans A, 
B, or C (see introductory notes above). 

350 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Adverse effects: vomiting (may indicate too rapid administration); 
hypernatraemia and hyperkalaemia (may result from overdose in renal 
impairment or administration of too concentrated a solution). 

17.5.2 Medicines for diarrhoea in children 

Zinc sulfate 
Oral liquid: in 10 mg per unit dosage forms. 
Tablet: in 10 mg per unit dosage forms. 

Zinc supplementation is used in combination with oral rehydration therapy in the 
management of acute diarrhoea in children. Zinc supplements given during an episode 
of acute diarrhoea reduce the severity and duration of the episode; if given for 10 to 
14 days zinc also reduces the incidence of new episodes of diarrhoea in the 2 to 3 
months following treatment. 

Uses: adjunct to oral rehydration therapy in acute diarrhoea. 
Precautions: acute renal failure (may accumulate); interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  
Adjunct to oral rehydration therapy in acute diarrhoea, by mouth, INFANT under 
6 months, 10 mg (elemental zinc) daily for 10–14 days; CHILD 6 months–
5 years, 20 mg (elemental zinc) daily for 10–14 days. 

ADMINISTRATION. Zinc sulfate tablets may be dispersed in breastmilk, in oral 
rehydration solution, or in water on a small spoon; older children may chew the tablets 
or swallow them with water. 

Adverse effects: abdominal pain, dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, 
gastric irritation, gastritis; irritability, headache, lethargy. 

17.5.3 Antidiarrhoeal (symptomatic) medicines in 
adults 

Opioids such as codeine are used in the symptomatic relief of uncomplicated, 
acute diarrhoea in adults, but are contraindicated in young children. Codeine 
acts on opioid receptors in the gut wall and decreases bowel motility. In 
dehydration, fluid and electrolyte replacement are of primary importance 
(sections 17.5.1 and 26). 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 351 



17. Gastrointestinal medicines 

Codeine 
Tablet: 30 mg (phosphate). 

Drug subject to international control under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 
(1961). 

Uses: short-term symptomatic relief of acute diarrhoea in adults; mild to 
moderate pain (section 2.2). 

Contraindications: children; conditions where inhibition of peristalsis should 
be avoided; abdominal distension; acute diarrhoeal conditions such as 
ulcerative colitis or antibiotic-associated colitis; acute respiratory depression 
including asthma attacks. 

Precautions: tolerance or dependence may occur with prolonged use; the 
elderly and debilitated patients; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal 
impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); overdosage: see section 4.2; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Symptomatic relief of acute diarrhoea, by mouth, ADULT, 30 mg 3–4 times daily. 
Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, constipation, drowsiness; respiratory 
depression and hypotension (with large doses); dependence; difficulty with 
micturition; ureteric or biliary spasm; dry mouth, sweating, headache, facial 
flushing, vertigo, bradycardia, tachycardia, palpitations, hypothermia, 
hallucinations, dysphoria, mood changes, miosis, decreased libido or 
potency, rash, urticaria, pruritus; convulsions (with large doses). 

352 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

 

 

 

SECTION 18:  
Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

18.1 Adrenal hormones and synthetic  
substitutes 354 

18.2 Androgens 358 

18.3 Contraceptives 360 

18.3.1  Oral hormonal contraceptives 360 

18.3.2  Injectable hormonal contraceptives 368 

18.3.3 Intrauterine devices 370 

18.3.4  Barrier methods 372 

18.3.5  Implantable contraceptives 373 

18.4 Estrogens 374 

18.5 Insulins and other antidiabetic agents 377 

18.6 Ovulation inducers 385 

18.7 Progestogens 386 

18.8 Thyroid hormones and antithyroid  
medicines 388 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 353 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

18.1 Adrenal hormones and synthetic substitutes 

Corticosteroids include hormones secreted by the adrenal cortex and synthetic 
analogues of these hormones. The adrenal cortex normally secretes 
hydrocortisone which has glucocorticoid activity and weak mineralocorticoid 
activity. It also secretes the mineralocorticoid, aldosterone. Synthetic 
glucocorticoids include betamethasone, dexamethasone and prednisolone. 
Although fludrocortisone [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] also 
has glucocorticoid properties, it is used for its potent mineralocorticoid 
effects.   
In physiological (low) doses, corticosteroids replace deficient endogenous 
hormones. In pharmacological (high) doses, glucocorticoids decrease 
inflammation (see section 3) and suppress the immune response (see 
section 8.1).   
In therapeutic doses, glucocorticoids suppress the release of corticotrophin 
(adrenocorticotrophic hormone, ACTH) from the pituitary gland, and the 
adrenal cortex ceases secretion of endogenous corticosteroids. If suppressive 
doses are given for prolonged periods, the adrenal cortex may atrophy; this can 
lead to a deficiency on sudden withdrawal (or dosage reduction) of the 
corticosteroid in situations such as stress or trauma when corticosteroid 
requirements are increased. After high dosage or prolonged therapy, 
withdrawal of the corticosteroid should therefore be gradual (see note on 
Withdrawal of systemic corticosteroids below). The suppressive effect of a 
corticosteroid on cortisol secretion is least when it is given as a single dose in 
the morning. Because the therapeutic effects of corticosteroids are of longer 
duration than the metabolic effects, intermittent therapy may allow the 
therapeutic effects to be maintained while reducing the metabolic effects. 
Alternate-day dosing is, however, suitable only in certain disease states and for 
corticosteroids with low mineralocorticoid activity and a relatively short 
duration of action.   
Hydrocortisone is used in adrenal replacement therapy and on a short-term 
basis by intravenous injection for the emergency management of some 
conditions, for example, anaphylaxis (section 3). Its mineralocorticoid activity 
is too high for it to be used on a long-term basis for disease control. The high 
mineralocorticoid activity of fludrocortisone is used together with a 
glucocorticoid in adrenal insufficiency.   
Prednisolone has predominantly glucocorticoid activity and is usually the 
preferred corticosteroid for long-term disease control.    
Dexamethasone has very high glucocorticoid activity and insignificant 
mineralocorticoid activity, making it particularly suitable for conditions where 

354 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

water retention would be a disadvantage. It also has a long duration of action 
and this, together with its lack of mineralocorticoid activity makes it 
particularly suitable for conditions requiring suppression of corticotrophin 
secretion, such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia.   

Disadvantages of corticosteroids 
Overdosage or prolonged use may exaggerate some of the normal 
physiological actions of corticosteroids leading to mineralocorticoid and 
glucocorticoid adverse effects. 
Mineralocorticoid adverse effects include hypertension, sodium and water 
retention, and potassium loss. These effects are most marked with 
fludrocortisones, are significant with hydrocortisone, occur slightly with 
prednisolone, and are negligible with dexamethasone.   
Glucocorticoid adverse effects include diabetes mellitus and osteoporosis; the 
latter is of particular importance in the elderly since it may result in 
osteoporotic fractures of the hip or vertebrae. High doses may also be 
associated with avascular necrosis of the femoral neck. Muscle wasting may 
also occur and there is a weak link with peptic ulceration. Mental disturbances 
can occur, including serious paranoid state or depression with risk of suicide, 
particularly in patients with a history of mental disorders; euphoria is also 
common. High doses may cause Cushing syndrome, which is characterized by 
a moon face, striae, and acne; it is usually reversible on withdrawal of 
treatment, but this should always be tapered gradually to avoid symptoms of 
acute adrenal insufficiency (see also note on Withdrawal of systemic 
corticosteroids below).  
In children, corticosteroids may result in suppression of growth and during 
pregnancy use of corticosteroids can affect adrenal development in the fetus. 
Any adrenal suppression in the neonate following prenatal exposure usually 
resolves spontaneously after birth and is rarely clinically important. In all age 
groups, healing of wounds may be impaired, and infections and thinning of the 
skin may occur; spread of infections may result from modification of tissue 
reactions.   

Adrenal suppression   
Adrenal suppression occurs during prolonged therapy with corticosteroids, 
leading to the development of adrenal atrophy which may persist for years 
after ceasation of therapy. Abrupt withdrawal after a prolonged period may 
therefore result in acute adrenal insufficiency, hypotension or even death (see 
note on Withdrawal of systemic corticosteroids below). Withdrawal may also 
be associated with fever, myalgia, arthralgia, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, painful 
itchy skin nodules, and weight loss.   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 355 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Corticosteroid cover during stress 

To compensate for a diminished adrenocortical response caused by prolonged 
corticosteroid treatment, any significant intercurrent illness, trauma, or surgery 
requires a temporary increase in corticosteroid dose, or if recently stopped, a 
temporary re-introduction of corticosteroid treatment. It is important 
therefore that anaesthetists know whether a patient is taking or has been taking 
a corticosteroid so as to avoid a precipitous fall in blood pressure during 
anaesthesia or in the immediate postoperative period. Suitable regimens for 
corticosteroid replacement, in patients who have taken more than 10 mg 
prednisolone daily (or equivalent) within 3 months of surgery, are as follows:   

- Minor surgery under general anaesthesia: usual oral corticosteroid dose on the 
morning of surgery or hydrocortisone, 25–50 mg, intravenously at 
induction; the usual oral corticosteroid dose is recommenced after surgery.  

- Moderate or major surgery: usual oral corticosteroid dose on the morning of 
surgery and hydrocortisone, 25–50 mg, intravenously at induction of 
anaesthesia, followed by hydrocortisone, 25–50 mg, 3 times a day by 
intravenous injection for 24 hours after moderate surgery or for 48–
72 hours after major surgery; the usual oral corticosteroid dose is 
recommenced on stopping hydrocortisone injections.   

Infections 
Prolonged courses of corticosteroids increase susceptibility to infections and 
increase their severity; clinical presentation of infections may also be atypical. 
Serious infections, for example, septicaemia and tuberculosis, may reach an 
advanced stage before being recognized; amoebiasis and strongyloidiasis may 
be activated or exacerbated (exclude the possibility of such infections before 
initiating a corticosteroid in those at risk or with suggestive symptoms). Fungal 
or viral ocular infections may also be exacerbated. 

Chickenpox 

Unless they have already had chickenpox, patients receiving oral or parenteral 
corticosteroids for purposes other than replacement should be regarded as 
being at risk of severe chickenpox. Manifestations of fulminant illness include 
pneumonia, hepatitis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation; rash is not 
necessarily a prominent feature.   
Passive immunization with varicella–zoster immunoglobulin [not included on 
the 15th WHO Model List] is needed for exposed non-immune patients 
receiving systemic corticosteroids or for those who have used them within the 
previous 3 months; varicella–zoster immunoglobulin should preferably be 
given within 3 days of exposure and no later than 10 days following exposure. 
Confirmed chickenpox warrants specialist care and urgent treatment; in such 

356 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

cases, corticosteroids should not be stopped and the dosage may even need to 
be increased.   
Topical, inhaled or rectal corticosteroids are less likely to be associated with an 
increased risk of severe chickenpox.   

Measles 

Patients taking corticosteroids should be advised to take particular care to 
avoid exposure to measles and to seek immediate medical advice if exposure 
occurs. Prophylaxis with intramuscular normal immunoglobulin (section 11.2) 
may be needed.   

Dosage and administration 
The adverse effects of systemic glucocorticoids, including suppression of the 
HPA (hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal) axis, are dose- and duration-dependent; 
thus patients should be given treatment for the shortest possible period and at 
the lowest dose that is clinically necessary. In life-threatening diseases, high 
doses are justified because the complications of glucocorticoid therapy are 
likely to be less serious than the disease itself. In long-term therapy for 
relatively benign chronic conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis, the adverse 
effects often outweigh the advantages. In order to minimize the adverse effects, 
the maintenance dose should be kept as low as possible and single morning 
doses or alternate-day therapy should be used in preference to other regimens. 
Glucocorticoids can improve the prognosis of serious conditions such as 
systemic lupus erythematosus, temporal arteritis, and polyarteritis nodosa; in 
such disorders the effects of the disease process may be suppressed and 
symptoms relieved but the underlying condition is not cured. 
A corticosteroid may be used in the management of raised intracranial pressure 
or cerebral oedema that occurs as a result of malignancy; high doses of 
dexamethasone are generally used for this purpose. However, a corticosteroid 
should not be used for the management of head injury or stroke because it is 
unlikely to be of benefit and may even be harmful.   
Glucocorticoids are used both topically and systemically. In emergency 
situations, hydrocortisone may be given intravenously. Whenever possible, 
local treatment with creams (for example, in inflammatory skin conditions; see 
section 13.3), intra-articular injections, inhalations (for example in asthma; see 
section 25.1), eye drops (for example in inflammatory eye conditions; see 
section 21.2) or enemas (section 17.3) should be used in preference to systemic 
therapy.   

Withdrawal of systemic corticosteroids 
The rate of withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids is dependent upon several 
factors, including size of dose, duration of treatment, individual response, and 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 357 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

likelihood of relapse of the underlying disease. If there is uncertainty about 
suppression of the HPA axis, withdrawal should be gradual to enable the 
adrenal gland to recover. Patients should be advised not to stop taking 
glucocorticoids abruptly unless instructed to do so by their doctor. 
Gradual withdrawal should be considered in those whose disease is unlikely to 
relapse and who have:   

- recently received repeated courses (particularly courses of more than 
3 weeks’ duration);  

- taken a short course within 1 year of stopping long-term therapy;  

- other possible causes of adrenal suppression;  

- received more than 40 mg prednisolone (or equivalent) daily; 

- been given repeat doses in the evening;  

- received more than 3 weeks’ treatment.    
Abrupt withdrawal may be considered in those whose disease is unlikely to 
relapse and who have received treatment for 3 weeks or less and who are not 
included in the patient groups described above.   
During corticosteroid withdrawal the dose may be reduced rapidly down to the 
physiological dosage (equivalent to 7.5 mg prednisolone daily) and then 
reduced more slowly. Assessment of the disease may be needed during 
withdrawal to ensure that relapse does not occur. 

18.2 Androgens 

Androgens are secreted by the testes and also by the adrenal cortex and the 
ovaries. In the male, they are responsible for the development and 
maintenance of the sex organs and the secondary sexual characteristics, normal 
reproductive function and sexual performance ability, in addition to 
stimulating the growth and development of the skeleton and skeletal muscle 
during puberty. At high doses in the normal male, androgens inhibit pituitary 
gonadotrophin secretion and depress spermatogenesis.  
Testosterone is used as replacement therapy in those who are hypogonadal 
due to either pituitary (secondary hypogonadism) or testicular disease (primary 
hypogonadism). However, androgens are ineffective as treatment for 
impotence and impaired spermatogenesis unless there is associated 
hypogonadism; they should not, therefore, be given until the hypogonadism 
has been properly investigated and treatment should always be under expert 
supervision. When androgens are given to patients with hypopituitarism, they 

358 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

can lead to normal sexual development and potency but not fertility. If fertility 
is desired, the usual treatment is with gonadotrophins or a pulsatile 
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone which will stimulate spermatogenesis as well 
as androgen production. Androgens cannot induce fertility in men with 
primary hypogonadism. Caution should be exercised in treating boys with 
delayed puberty with excessive doses of testosterone since the fusion of 
epiphyses is hastened and this may result in short stature. Androgens, 
including testosterone, have been used in postmenopausal women for the 
palliative treatment of androgen-responsive, advanced, metastatic breast cancer; 
care is required to prevent masculinizing effects. 

Testosterone 
Injection: 200 mg (enantate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

Testosterone is a complementary list androgenic medicine. 

Uses: hypogonadism; palliative treatment of advanced breast cancer in women. 
Contraindications: breast cancer in men, prostate cancer; hypercalcaemia; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); nephrotic syndrome; 
history of primary liver tumours. 

Precautions: cardiac disease; renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); the elderly; ischaemic heart disease, hypertension; 
epilepsy, migraine, diabetes mellitus, skeletal metastases (risk of 
hypercalcaemia); examine prostate and breast regularly during treatment; 
prepubertal boys; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Hypogonadism, by slow intramuscular injection, ADULT (males), initially  
200–250 mg every 2–3 weeks; usual maintenance dose, 200–250 mg every 
3–6 weeks. 

Breast cancer, by slow intramuscular injection, ADULT (females), 250 mg every  
2–3 weeks. 

Adverse effects: prostate abnormalities and prostate cancer, headache, 
depression, gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, polycythaemia, cholestatic 
jaundice, changes in libido, gynaecomastia, anxiety, asthenia, paraesthesia; 
electrolyte disturbances including sodium retention with oedema and 
hypercalcaemia, hypertension, and weight gain; increased bone growth; 
androgenic effects including hirsutism, male-pattern baldness, seborrhoea, 
acne, pruritus, priapism, precocious sexual development and premature 
closure of epiphyses in prepubertal males, virilism in females, and 
suppression of spermatogenesis in men; rarely liver tumours; sleep apnoea 
also reported. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 359 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

 
18.3 Contraceptives 

WHO publishes guidelines on the use of contraceptives, including the Medical eligibility 
criteria for contraceptive use, available at www.who.int/reproductive-
health/publications/mec, and the Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 
available at www.who.int/reproductive-health/publications/spr. 

Parenteral hormonal contraception  
Medroxyprogesterone acetate and norethisterone enantate are long-acting 
progestogens given by intramuscular injection every 3 months and every 
2 months respectively. Women should be counselled about the likelihood of 
menstrual disturbance and the potential for a delay in return to full fertility; 
delayed return of fertility and irregular cycles may occur after discontinuation 
of treatment but there is no evidence of permanent infertility. Heavy bleeding 
has been reported in patients given parenteral progestogen-only contraceptives 
in the immediate puerperium (the first dose is best delayed until 6 weeks after 
birth). If the woman is not breast-feeding, the first injection may be given 
within 5 days after birth (she should be warned that the risk of heavy or 
prolonged bleeding may be increased). Parenteral progestogen-only 
contraceptives reliably inhibit ovulation, and protect against ectopic pregnancy 
and functional ovarian cysts.  
Reduction in bone mineral density and rare cases of osteoporosis and 
osteoporotic fractures have been reported with medroxyprogesterone acetate; 
the reduction in bone mineral density occurs in the first 2–3 years of use and 
then stabilizes.  

18.3.1 Oral hormonal contraceptives 

Hormonal contraception is one of the most effective methods of reversible 
fertility control. 

Combined oral contraceptives 
Estrogen plus progestogen combinations are the most widely used hormonal 
contraceptives. They produce a contraceptive effect mainly by suppressing the 
hypothalamic-pituitary system (resulting in prevention of ovulation), but also 
by causing changes in the endometrium that make it unreceptive to 
implantation. 

360 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Endometrial proliferation is usually followed by thinning or regression of the 
endometrium resulting in reduced menstrual flow. Ovulation usually resumes 
within 3 menstrual cycles after oral contraception has been discontinued; 
anovulation and amenorrhoea persisting for 6 months or longer requires 
investigation and appropriate treatment if necessary. 
Potential non-contraceptive benefits of combined oral contraceptives include 
improved regularity of the menstrual cycle, decreased blood loss, reduce risk of 
iron-deficiency anaemia, and significant decrease in dysmenorrhoea. Long-
term use is associated with reduced risk of endometrial and ovarian cancer and 
of some pelvic infections. 
There may be an association between the amount of estrogen and progestogen 
in combined oral contraceptives and the increased risk of adverse 
cardiovascular effects. The use of oral contraceptive combinations containing 
the progestogens, desogestrel or gestodene [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List], is associated with a slightly increased risk of venous 
thromboembolism compared with oral contraceptives containing the 
progestogens, levonorgestrel or norethisterone. 

Risk factors for venous thromboembolism or arterial disease 

Risk factors for venous thromboembolism include family history of venous 
thromboembolism in a first-degree relative aged under 45 years, obesity, long-
term immobilization, and varicose veins. 
Risk factors for arterial disease include family history of arterial disease in a first-
degree relative aged under 45 years, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, smoking, 
age over 35 years (avoid if over 50 years), obesity, and migraine. 
If any one of the above risk factors is present, combined oral contraceptives 
should be used with caution; if two or more factors for either venous 
thromboembolism or arterial disease are present, combined oral contraceptives 
should be avoided. Combined oral contraceptives are contraindicated in 
migraine with aura, in severe migraine without aura regularly lasting over 
72 hours despite treatment and in migraine treated with ergot derivatives. 

Surgery 

Estrogen-containing oral contraceptives should preferably be discontinued 
(and adequate alternative contraceptive arrangements made) 4 weeks before 
major elective surgery and before all surgery to the legs or surgery which 
involves prolonged immobilization of a lower limb. They should normally be 
restarted at the first menses occurring at least 2 weeks after full mobilization. 
When discontinuation is not possible, thromboprophylaxis [with heparin 
(section 10.2) and graduated compression hosiery] is advised. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 361 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Reasons to stop combined oral contraceptives immediately 

Combined estrogen-containing oral contraceptives should be stopped 
immediately if any of the following symptoms occur and resumed only after 
consultation with a health-care provider: 

- sudden severe chest pain (even if not radiating to left arm);  

- sudden breathlessness (or cough with blood-stained sputum); 

- severe pain in calf of one leg;  

- severe stomach pain; 

- serious neurological effects such as unusual, severe, prolonged headache 
(especially if first occurrence or headache are getting progressively worse) 
or sudden partial or complete loss of vision or sudden disturbance of 
hearing or other perceptual disorders or dysphagia or bad fainting attack or 
collapse or first unexplained epileptic seizure or weakness, motor 
disturbances, or very marked numbness suddenly affecting one side or one 
part of body; 

- hepatitis, jaundice, liver enlargement; 

- blood pressure above 160 mmHg systolic and 100 mmHg diastolic; 

- detection of two or more risk factors for venous thromboembolism or 
arterial disease (see note above). 

Progestogen-only contraceptives 
Progestogen-only contraceptives, such as oral levonorgestrel, may offer a 
suitable alternative when estrogens are contraindicated. However, oral 
progestogen-only preparations do not prevent ovulation in all cycles and have 
a higher failure rate than combined estrogen-containing preparations. 
Progestogen-only contraceptives carry less risk of thromboembolic and 
cardiovascular disease than combined oral contraceptives and are preferable 
for women at increased risk of such complications, for example, smokers over 
35 years. They can be used as an alternative to estrogen-containing combined 
preparations prior to major surgery. Oral progestogen-only contraceptives may 
be started 3 weeks after birth; breastfeeding women should preferably delay 
starting until at least 6 weeks after birth. Menstrual irregularities 
(oligomenorrhoea, menorrhagia, amenorrhoea) are common. 

Emergency contraception 

Levonorgestrel is used for emergency contraception. Levonorgestrel, 1.5 mg, 
should be taken as a single dose within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse; 
alternatively, levonorgestrel, 750 micrograms, can be taken within 72 hours of 

362 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

unprotected intercourse followed 12 hours later by another dose of 
750 micrograms. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, 
breast discomfort, and menstrual irregularities. If vomiting occurs within  
2–3 hours of taking the tablets, replacement tablets can be given with an 
antiemetic. 
It should be explained to the woman that her next period may be early or late; 
that she needs to use a barrier contraceptive method until her next period, and 
that she should seek medical advice promptly if she has any lower abdominal 
pain (because this could signify an ectopic pregnancy) or if the subsequent 
menstrual bleed is abnormally light, heavy, brief, or absent. There is no 
evidence of harmful effects to the fetus if pregnancy should occur. 

Ethinylestradiol + levonorgestrel 
Tablet: 30 micrograms + 150 micrograms. 

Ethinylestradiol with levonorgestrelis a representative combined oral contraceptive 
preparation. Various combinations can serve as alternatives.    

Uses: contraception; menstrual symptoms; endometriosis (see also 
section 18.7). 

Contraindications: use within 3 weeks of birth; breastfeeding (until weaning or 
for the first 6 months after birth; Appendix 3); personal history of two or 
more risk factors for venous thromboembolism and arterial disease (see 
also note above); heart disease associated with pulmonary hypertension or 
risk of embolism; migraine with typical focal aura; severe migraine without 
aura but regularly lasting over 72 hours duration despite treatment or 
migraine treated with ergot derivatives (see also note below); history of sub-
acute bacterial endocarditis; ischaemic cerebrovascular disease; liver disease 
including disorders of hepatic secretion such as Dubin-Johnson and Rotor 
syndromes, infectious hepatitis (unless liver function is restored to normal); 
porphyria; systemic lupus erythematosus; liver adenoma; history of 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome; gallstones; estrogen-dependent neoplasms; 
neoplasms of breast or genital tract; undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; history 
during pregnancy of pruritus, chorea, deteriorating otosclerosis, cholestatic 
jaundice, or pemphigoid gestationis; after evacuation of hydatidiform mole 
(unless urine and plasma gonadotrophin values are restored to normal).   

Precautions: risk factors for venous thromboembolism and arterial disease 
(see also note above); migraine without focal aura or controlled with 5HT1 
agonist (see also note below); hyperprolactinaemia (seek specialist advice); 
some types of hyperlipidaemia; gallbladder disease; history of severe 
depression especially if induced by hormonal contraception; long-term 
immobilization (see also note on Travel below); sickle-cell disease; 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 363 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

inflammatory bowel disease including Crohn disease; interactions: 
Appendix 1.   

MIGRAINE. Patients should report any increase in headache frequency or onset of 
focal symptoms (discontinue immediately and refer urgently to neurology expert if focal 
neurological symptoms not typical of aura persist for more than 1 hour).  

TRAVEL. Women taking oral contraceptives may be at increased risk of deep-vein 
thrombosis during travel involving long periods of immobility (over 5 hours). The risk 
may be reduced by appropriate exercise during the journey, and possibly by wearing 
elastic hosiery. 
Dose:  
Contraception, by mouth, ADULT (female), 1 tablet daily for 21 days; subsequent 
courses repeated after a 7-day interval (during which withdrawal bleeding 
occurs); by mouth, [everyday (ED) preparations], ADULT (female), 1 active 
tablet daily started on day 1 of the cycle; subsequent courses repeated 
without interval (withdrawal bleeding occurs when inactive tablets are being 
taken).   
ADMINISTRATION. Each tablet (“pill”) should be taken at approximately the 
same time each day; if delayed by longer than 24 hours, contraceptive protection 
may be lost (see note on Missed pill below).   

MISSED PILL. The critical time for loss of contraception protection is when a pill 
is omitted either at the beginning or at the end of a cycle (at this lengthens the pill free 
interval). If a woman forgets to take a pill, she should take it as soon as she 
remembers, and take the next one at the normal time. If the delay with any pill is 
24 hours or longer (but especially with the first one in the packet), the pill may not 
work. She should still continue taking the pill normally but be aware that she will not 
be protected for the next 7 days and must therefore either not have sex or use 
another method of contraception, such as a condom. If these 7 days run beyond the 
end of the packet, the next packet should be started at once, omitting the pill-free 
interval (or, in the case of ED pills, omitting the 7 inactive tablets). Emergency 
contraception is recommended if more than 2 combined oral contraceptive tablets 
are missed from the first 7 tablets in a packet.   

DIARRHOEA AND VOMITING. Vomiting within 2 hours of taking an oral 
contraceptive or very severe diarrhoea can interfere with the absorption of the pill. 
Additional precautions should be used during, and for 7 days after, recovery (see 
also note on Missed pill above). If vomiting and diarrhoea occur during the last 7 
pills, the next pill-free period should be omitted (or in the case of ED tablets, the 
inactive ones should be omitted).   

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, headache, breast tenderness, increase in 
body weight, thrombosis, changes in libido, depression, chorea, skin 
reactions, chloasma, hypertension, impairment of liver function, “spotting” 
in early cycles, absence of withdrawal bleeding, irritation of contact lenses; 
rarely photosensitivity reactions and hepatic tumours; breast cancer (studies 
have shown a small increase in risk of having breast cancer diagnosed in 
women using the combined oral contraceptive; this relative risk may be due 

364 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

to earlier diagnosis; cancers diagnosed early are more likely to be localized 
to the breast; risk appears to relate to the age at which the contraceptive is 
stopped rather than to the total duration of use; any increased risk 
disappears gradually during the 10 years after stopping and there is no 
excess risk after 10 years; a small increase in the risk of breast cancer should 
be weighed against the protective effect against cancers of the ovary and 
endometrium). 

Ethinylestradiol + norethisterone 
Tablet: 35 micrograms + 1 mg. 

Ethinylestradiol with norethisterone is a representative combined oral contraceptive 
preparation. Various combinations can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: contraception; menstrual symptoms; endometriosis (see also 
section 18.7). 

Contraindications: use within 3 weeks of birth; breastfeeding (until weaning or 
for the first 6 months after birth; Appendix 3); personal history of two or 
more risk factors for venous thromboembolism and arterial disease (see 
also note above); heart disease associated with pulmonary hypertension or 
risk of embolism; migraine with typical focal aura; severe migraine without 
aura but regularly lasting over 72 hours duration despite treatment or 
migraine treated with ergot derivatives (see also note below); history of sub-
acute bacterial endocarditis; ischaemic cerebrovascular disease; liver disease 
including disorders of hepatic secretion such as Dubin-Johnson and Rotor 
syndromes, infectious hepatitis (unless liver function is restored to normal); 
porphyria; systemic lupus erythematosus; liver adenoma; history of 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome; gallstones; estrogen-dependent neoplasms; 
neoplasms of breast or genital tract; undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; history 
during pregnancy of pruritus, chorea, deteriorating otosclerosis, cholestatic 
jaundice, or pemphigoid gestationis; after evacuation of hydatidiform mole 
(unless urine and plasma gonadotrophin values are restored to normal).   

Precautions: risk factors for venous thromboembolism and arterial disease 
(see also note above); migraine without focal aura or controlled with 5HT1 
agonist (see also note below); hyperprolactinaemia (seek specialist advice); 
some types of hyperlipidaemia; gallbladder disease; history of severe 
depression especially if induced by hormonal contraception; long-term 
immobilization (see also note on Travel below); sickle-cell disease; 
inflammatory bowel disease including Crohn disease; interactions: 
Appendix 1.   

MIGRAINE. Patients should report any increase in headache frequency or onset of 
focal symptoms (discontinue immediately and refer urgently to neurology expert if focal 
neurological symptoms not typical of aura persist for more than 1 hour).  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 365 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

TRAVEL. Women taking oral contraceptives may be at increased risk of deep-vein 
thrombosis during travel involving long periods of immobility (over 5 hours). The risk 
may be reduced by appropriate exercise during the journey, and possibly by wearing 
elastic hosiery. 
Dose:  
Contraception, by mouth, ADULT (female), 1 tablet daily for 21 days; subsequent 
courses repeated after a 7-day interval (during which withdrawal bleeding 
occurs); by mouth, [everyday (ED) preparations], ADULT (female), 1 active 
tablet daily started on day 1 of the cycle; subsequent courses repeated 
without interval (withdrawal bleeding occurs when inactive tablets are being 
taken).   
ADMINISTRATION. Each tablet (“pill”) should be taken at approximately the 
same time each day; if delayed by longer than 24 hours, contraceptive protection 
may be lost (see note on Missed pill below).   

MISSED PILL. The critical time for loss of contraception protection is when a pill 
is omitted either at the beginning or at the end of a cycle (at this lengthens the pill free 
interval). If a woman forgets to take a pill, she should take it as soon as she 
remembers, and take the next one at the normal time. If the delay with any pill is 
24 hours or longer (but especially with the first one in the packet), the pill may not 
work. She should still continue taking the pill normally but be aware that she will not 
be protected for the next 7 days and must therefore either not have sex or use 
another method of contraception, such as a condom. If these 7 days run beyond the 
end of the packet, the next packet should be started at once, omitting the pill-free 
interval (or, in the case of ED pills, omitting the 7 inactive tablets). Emergency 
contraception is recommended if more than 2 combined oral contraceptive tablets 
are missed from the first 7 tablets in a packet.   

DIARRHOEA AND VOMITING. Vomiting within 2 hours of taking an oral 
contraceptive or very severe diarrhoea can interfere with the absorption of the pill. 
Additional precautions should be used during, and for 7 days after, recovery (see 
also note on Missed pill above). If vomiting and diarrhoea occur during the last 7 
pills, the next pill-free period should be omitted (or in the case of ED tablets, the 
inactive ones should be omitted).   

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, headache, breast tenderness, increase in 
body weight, thrombosis, changes in libido, depression, chorea, skin 
reactions, chloasma, hypertension, impairment of liver function, “spotting” 
in early cycles, absence of withdrawal bleeding, irritation of contact lenses; 
rarely photosensitivity reactions and hepatic tumours; breast cancer (studies 
have shown a small increase in risk of having breast cancer diagnosed in 
women using the combined oral contraceptive; this relative risk may be due 
to earlier diagnosis; cancers diagnosed early are more likely to be localized 
to the breast; risk appears to relate to the age at which the contraceptive is 
stopped rather than to the total duration of use; any increased risk 
disappears gradually during the 10 years after stopping and there is no 
excess risk after 10 years; a small increase in the risk of breast cancer should 

366 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

be weighed against the protective effect against cancers of the ovary and 
endometrium). 

Levonorgestrel 
Tablet: 30 micrograms; 750 micrograms (pack of two); 1.5 mg. 

Uses: contraception (particularly when estrogens are contraindicated); 
emergency hormonal contraception. 

Contraindications: contraception: severe arterial disease; liver tumours; history 
of breast cancer (may be used after 5 years if no evidence of current disease); 
thromboembolic disorders; porphyria; emergency contraception: porphyria. 

Precautions: undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; cardiac disease; past ectopic 
pregnancy; active liver disease, recurrent cholestatic jaundice; migraine; 
diabetes mellitus; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Contraception, by mouth, ADULT (female), 1 tablet (30 micrograms) daily, 
starting on day 1 of the cycle and then continuously. 
ADMINISTRATION. Each tablet (“pill”) should be taken at approximately the 
same time each day. If delayed for longer than 3 hours, contraceptive protection 
may be lost. 

MISSED PILL. If a pill is not taken on time, it should be taken as soon as possible, 
and the next one taken at the usual time. If administration is delayed by more than 
3 hours, the woman should resume taking the pill at the usual time as soon as 
possible; furthermore, because contraceptive efficacy is reduced, an additional 
method of contraception (such as a condom) is required for 2 days. Emergency 
contraception may be considered if 1 or more progestogen-only contraceptive pills 
are missed or taken more than 3 hours late and intercourse has occurred before 
2 further tablets have been taken correctly. 

DIARRHOEA AND VOMITING. Vomiting within 2 hours of taking an oral 
contraceptive or very severe diarrhoea can interfere with the absorption of the pill. 
Additional precautions should be used during and for 2 days after recovery (see also 
note on Missed pill above). 

Emergency (post-coital) contraception, by mouth, ADULT (female), 1.5 mg as a 
single dose (taken within 120 hours (5 days) of unprotected intercourse) or 
750 micrograms (taken within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse) 
followed by a second dose of 750 micrograms 12 hours later 

ADMINISTRATION. Taking emergency contraception as soon as possible after 
unprotected intercourse increases its efficacy; however, it should not be administered if 
menstrual bleeding is already overdue. 

Adverse effects: menstrual irregularities (including oligomenorrhoea and 
menorrhagia usually resolve with long-term treatment); nausea, vomiting, 
headache, dizziness, breast discomfort, depression, skin disorders, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 367 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

disturbances of appetite, weight increase, change in libido; breast cancer 
(studies have shown a small increase in the risk of having breast cancer 
diagnosed in women using, or who have recently used, a progestogen-only 
contraceptive pill; this relative risk may be due to earlier diagnosis; risk 
appears to relate to the age at which the contraceptive is stopped rather 
than to the total duration of use; any increased risk disappears gradually 
during the 10 years after stopping and there is no excess risk after 10 years; 
the small increase in the risk of breast cancer should be weighed against the 
benefits). 

18.3.2 Injectable hormonal contraceptives 

Medroxyprogesterone acetate and norethisterone enantate are long-acting 
progestogens which are given by intramuscular injection every 3 months and 
every 2 months, respectively. Women should be counselled about the 
likelihood of menstrual disturbance and the potential for a delay in return to 
full fertility; although delayed return of fertility and irregular cycles may occur 
after discontinuation of treatment with injectable progestogens, there is no 
evidence of permanent infertility. Heavy bleeding has been reported in patients 
given parenteral progestogen-only contraceptives in the immediate puerperium 
and thus the first dose is best delayed until 6 weeks after birth. If the woman is 
not breastfeeding, the first injection may be given within 5 days after birth but 
she should be warned that the risk of heavy or prolonged bleeding may be 
increased. Parenteral progestogen-only contraceptives reliably inhibit ovulation, 
and protect against ectopic pregnancy and functional ovarian cysts. 
Reduction in bone mineral density and rare cases of osteoporosis and 
osteoporotic fractures have been reported with medroxyprogesterone acetate; 
the reduction in bone mineral density occurs in the first 2–3 years of use and 
then stablizes. 
Medroxyprogesterone acetate + estradiol cipionate is a combined 
progestogen plus estrogen preparation given monthly by intramuscular 
injection. Medroxyprogesterone + estradiol cipionate is associated with fewer 
menstrual disturbances and a faster return to fertility after discontinuation than 
progestogen-only contraceptives.  

Estradiol cypionate + medroxyprogesterone acetate 
Injection: 5 mg + 25 mg.  

Uses: parenteral combined progestogen-estrogen contraception (short-term). 
Contraindications: see under Combined oral contraceptives (section 18.3.1). 

368 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Precautions: see under Combined oral contraceptives (section 18.3.1); 
interactions: Appendix 1 (see under Contraceptives, oral). 

Dose:  
Contraception, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT (female), estradiol cipionate, 
5 mg  + medroxyprogesterone acetate, 25 mg, as a single dose within the 
first 7 days of the menstrual cycle, repeated monthly. 
ADMINISTRATION. If the interval between injections is greater than 35 days, 
exclude pregnancy before administering the next injection and advise patient to use 
additional contraceptive measures (for example, a condom) for 7 days after the 
injection. 

Adverse effects: menstrual irregularities (usually stabilize after initial months 
of use); less commonly weight gain, headache, and dizziness; abdominal 
pain, acne, alopecia, asthenia, breast tenderness, decreased libido, 
depression, enlarged abdomen, nausea, nervousness, and vulvovaginal 
disorder reported. 

Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
Depot injection: 150 mg/ml in 1-ml vial. 

Uses: parenteral progestogen-only contraception (short- or long-term); 
menstrual symptoms and endometriosis (section 18.7). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); history of breast cancer (may be 
used after 5 years if no evidence of current disease); undiagnosed vaginal 
bleeding; history of pruritus during pregnancy; active liver disease 
(Appendix 5); severe arterial disease; multiple risk factors for venous 
thromboembolism and arterial disease (see note in section 18.3.1); 
porphyria. 

Precautions: migraine; liver disease (Appendix 5); thromboembolic or 
coronary vascular disease; diabetes mellitus; hypertension; renal disease; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Contraception (short-term), by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT (female), 
150 mg within the first 7 days of cycle or within the first 5 days after 
parturition (delay until 6 weeks after parturition if breastfeeding). 

Contraception (long-term), by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT (female), as for 
short-term, repeated every 3 months. 
ADMINISTRATION. If the interval between injections is greater than 3 months 
and 14 days, exclude pregnancy before administering the next injection and advise 
patient to use additional contraceptive measures (for example, a condom) for 7 days 
after the injection. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 369 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

PATIENT ADVICE. It is recommended that before treatment, women receive full 
counselling (backed by a manufacturer’s approved leaflet if possible) about the 
likelihood of menstrual irregularities and the potential for a delay in return to full 
fertility with long-term use. 

Adverse effects: menstrual irregularities; delayed return to fertility; reduction 
in bone mineral density; weight gain; depression; rarely anaphylaxis; 
injection-site reactions; breast cancer (small increase in risk of breast cancer; 
see also Adverse effects under Levonorgestrel in section 18.3.1). 

Norethisterone enantate 
Oily injection: 200 mg/ml in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: parenteral progestogen-only contraception (short-term). 
Contraindications: see under Medroxyprogesterone acetate. 
Precautions: see under Medroxyprogesterone acetate; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Short-term contraception, by deep intramuscular injection into gluteal muscle, 

ADULT (female), 200 mg within the first 7 days of the menstrual cycle or 
immediately after parturition; repeated after 2 months. 
ADMINISTRATION. If the interval between injections is greater than 2 months 
and 14 days, exclude pregnancy before administering the next injection and advise 
patient to use additional contraceptive measures (for example, a condom) for 7 days 
after the injection. 

PATIENT ADVICE. It is recommended that before treatment, women receive full 
counselling (backed by a manufacturer’s approved leaflet if possible) about the 
likelihood of menstrual irregularities and the potential of delay in the return to full 
fertility with long-term use. 

Adverse effects: bloating, breast discomfort, headache, dizziness, depression, 
nausea, menstrual irregularities; delayed return to fertility; rarely weight gain; 
injection-site reactions. 

18.3.3 Intrauterine devices 

Copper-bearing intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUDs) consist of a plastic 
carrier wound with copper wire or fitted with copper bands; some also have a 
central core of silver to prevent fragmentation of copper. Smaller devices have 
been introduced to minimize adverse effects and the replacement time for 
these devices is normally between 3 and 8 years. On this basis, and as fertility 

370 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

declines with age, copper intrauterine device fitted in a woman over 40 years of 
age, may remain in the uterus until the menopause.  
The intrauterine device (or “coil”) is appropriate for women who expect to use 
it for continuous long-term contraception. It is suitable for older parous 
women; intrauterine devices should be used with caution in young nulliparous 
women because of the increased risk of expulsion. Young women at risk of 
sexually transmitted infections are also at risk of pelvic inflammatory disease. 
The timing and technique of fitting an intrauterine device are critical for its 
performance and call for proper training and experience. Women should 
receive full counselling backed by the manufacturer’s approved leaflet. For 
routine contraception, the device can be inserted into the uterus between 4 and 
12 days after the start of menstruation (see note below for use as emergency 
contraception). There is an increased risk of infection for 20 days after 
insertion; however, the increased risk may be related to undetected pre-existing 
lower genital tract infections. Pre-screening (at least for chlamydia and 
gonorrhoea) should be performed if feasible and appropriate. If sustained 
pelvic or lower abdominal pain occur during the following 20 days after 
insertion of the device, the woman should be treated as having acute pelvic 
inflammatory disease.  
An intrauterine device should not be removed in mid-cycle unless an 
additional contraceptive was used for the previous 7 days. If removal is 
essential (for example, to treat severe pelvic infection) post-coital 
contraception should be considered. If the woman becomes pregnant, the 
device should be removed in the first trimester and the possibility of ectopic 
pregnancy considered; if the threads of the intrauterine device are already 
missing on presentation, the pregnancy is at risk of second trimester abortion, 
haemorrhage, pre-term delivery, and infection. 

Emergency contraception 

Insertion of a copper intrauterine contraceptive device is more effective than 
hormonal methods of emergency contraception; the device can be inserted at 
any time in the menstrual cycle within 5 days of unprotected intercourse. 
Sexually transmitted diseases should be excluded and insertion of the device 
should usually be covered by antibacterial prophylaxis. 

Copper-containing device 
Uses: contraception; emergency contraception. 
Contraindications: pregnancy; severe anaemia; use within 48 hours–4 weeks of 
birth; puerperal sepsis; postseptic abortion; cervical or endometrial cancer; 
pelvic inflammatory disease; recent sexually transmitted disease (if not fully 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 371 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

investigated and treated); pelvic tuberculosis; unexplained uterine bleeding; 
active trophoblastic disease; distorted or small uterine cavity; copper allergy; 
Wilson disease; medical diathermy. 

Precautions: anaemia; heavy menstrual bleeding, endometriosis, severe 
primary dysmenorrhoea, history of pelvic inflammatory disease, ovarian 
cancer, fertility problems, nulliparity and young age, severely scarred uterus 
or severe cervical stenosis, valvular heart disease or history of endocarditis 
(antibacterial cover recommended at insertion); HIV infection or 
immunosuppressive therapy (increased risk of infection; avoid if marked 
immunosuppression); increased risk of expulsion if inserted before uterine 
involution; gynaecological examination before insertion and 4–6 weeks 
afterwards (counsel women to see doctor promptly if significant symptoms, 
such as pain, occur; anticoagulant therapy; remove if pregnancy occurs 
(consider possibility of ectopic pregnancy). 

Administration:  

Contraception, ADULT (female), insert at any time between day 4 and day 12 
after the start of menstrual bleeding; do not fit during heavy menstrual 
bleeding. 

Emergency contraception, ADULT (female), insert up to 120 hours (5 days) 
after unprotected intercourse, at any time of the menstrual cycle; if 
intercourse has occurred more than 5 days previously, the device can still be 
inserted up to 5 days after the earliest likely calculated day of ovulation; the 
device can be removed at the beginning of menstruation if no longer 
required. 

Adverse effects: uterine or cervical perforation, displacement, expulsion; 
exacerbation of pelvic infection; heavy menstrual bleeding; dysmenorrhoea; 
pain and bleeding and occasionally epileptic seizure or vasovagal attack on 
insertion. 

18.3.4 Barrier methods 

Barrier methods are not as effective in preventing conception as hormonal 
contraception and copper intrauterine devices. Spermicidal methods when used alone 
are generally considered to be relatively ineffective and such use is not recommended. 

Barriers, male latex condoms, male non-latex condoms or female non-latex condoms; 
diaphragm or cervical caps. 

Uses: contraception; for condoms, also to decrease risk of transmission of 
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.  

Precautions: oil-based products including baby oil, massage oil, lipstick, 
petroleum jelly, sun-tan oil (can damage latex condoms and render them 

372 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

less effective as barrier method of contraception and as a protection from 
sexually transmitted infections, including HIV —  if a lubricant is required, 
use one that is water-based); male condom must be put on before the penis 
touches the vaginal area and the penis must not touch the vaginal area after 
the condom has been taken off; spermicides or diaphragm  not suitable for 
women at high risk of HIV infection or with HIV infection. 

Adverse effects: vaginal and cervical irritation (spermicides), toxic shock 
syndrome (diaphragm, cap). 

18.3.5 Implantable contraceptives 

Levonorgestrel is a progestogen, which is available as a subdermal implant. It 
provides long-term contraception, which is rapidly reversed upon removal. 
Levonorgestrel implants are an alternative for women in whom copper-
containing intrauterine devices (section 18.3.3) are unsuitable because of pelvic 
inflammatory disease, dysmenorrhoea, or heavy menstrual bleeding. 
Levonorgestrel implant insertion and removal requires training.  

Levonorgestrel-releasing implant 
Two-rod levonorgestrel-releasing implant, each rod containing 75 mg of 
levonorgestrel (150 mg total). 

Uses: parenteral progestogen-only contraception (long-term). 
Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); ischaemic heart disease, stroke; 
migraine with aura; thromboembolic disorders, unexplained vaginal 
bleeding; breast cancer; active viral hepatitis, severe liver disease 
(Appendix 5); liver tumours. 

Precautions: hypertension, heart disease, history of thromboembolism, 
epilepsy, migraine without aura, depression, gallbladder disease, diabetes 
mellitus, elevated cholesterol or triglycerides; breast nodules; breastfeeding 
(until weaning or for the first and less 6 months after birth; Appendix 3); 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

Administration:  

Contraception (long-term), ADULT (female), 150 mg implant; insert subdermally 
in non-dominant upper arm 6–8 cm above the elbow within the first 7 days 
of the menstrual cycle; remove and replace after 4–5 years depending on 
preparation. 

NOTE. Implant insertion and removal requires specialist training (consult 
manufacturer’s literature).  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 373 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Adverse effects: menstrual irregularities, headache, dizziness, lower abdominal 
pain, weight gain, acne; nausea, mood changes, breast tenderness, and loss 
of libido also reported. 

18.4 Estrogens 

Estrogens are necessary for the development of female secondary sexual 
characteristics; they also stimulate myometrial hypertrophy and endometrial 
hyperplasia. They affect bone density by increasing calcium deposition. They 
are secreted at varying rates during the menstrual cycle throughout the period 
of activity of the ovaries. During pregnancy, the placenta becomes the main 
source of estrogens. Ovarian secretion declines at the menopause. 
Estrogen therapy is given cyclically or continuously principally for 
contraception(sections 18.3.1 and 18.3.2) and for the alleviation of menopausal 
symptoms. If long-term therapy is required for menopausal symptoms a 
progestogen should normally be added to prevent cystic hyperplasia of the 
endometrium (or of endometrial foci in women who have had a hysterectomy) 
and possible transformation to cancer. 
The palliative care of advanced inoperable, metastatic carcinoma of the breast 
in both men and postmenopausal women is another indication for estrogen 
therapy. 

Hormone replacement therapy 
Estrogens are used for replacement therapy in perimenopausal and 
menopausal women who are unduly affected by symptoms such as vasomotor 
instability and vulval and vaginal atrophy. Estrogens can also help to prevent 
postmenopausal osteoporosis but drugs that have a specific effect on bone 
metabolism are now preferred for this condition. 
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) does not prevent coronary heart disease, 
nor does it protect against a decline in cognitive function and it should not be 
prescribed for these reasons. The minimum effective dose of HRT should be 
used for the shortest duration possible, and treatment should be reviewed at 
least annually. 
While a short course of a topical vaginal estrogen preparation can relieve 
symptoms of vulval and vaginal atrophy, systemic HRT is required to alleviate 
vasomotor symptoms. 
In women with an intact uterus (or endometrial foci), the addition of a 
progestogen to the estrogen therapy reduces the risk of endometrial cancer 
(but can slightly increase the risk of breast cancer). Medroxyprogesterone 

374 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

acetate may be given in a dose of 10 mg daily for the last 12–14 days of each 
cycle of estrogen therapy. Alternatively, norethisterone, 1 mg daily, may be 
given on the last 12–14 days of each 28-day estrogen cycle (see also 
section 18.7). 
HRT may be considered for women with early natural or surgical menopause 
(before the age of 45 years); however, alternatives to HRT should be 
considered if osteoporosis is the main concern. For early menopause, HRT 
can be given until the approximate age of natural menopause (until the age of 
50 years). 

Risks of HRT 

When prescribing HRT, women must be made aware of the increased 
incidence of venous thromboembolism, of stroke and, after some years of use, of 
endometrial cancer (reduced by a progestogen) and breast cancer. Each decision to 
start HRT should be made on an individual basis, and treatment should be 
regularly reappraised. Factors such as concomitant corticosteroid therapy, 
family history of osteoporosis, thinness, level of exercise, alcoholism or 
smoking, early menopause, and fractures to the hip or forearm before the age 
of 65 years should be taken into account when considering the use of HRT; 
women of African origin appear to be less susceptible to osteoporosis than 
those who are white or of Asian origin. 
There is an increased risk of deep-vein thrombosis and of pulmonary embolism in 
women taking HRT, especially in the first year of use. About 10 in every 
1000 women aged 50–59 years not using HRT develop venous 
thromboembolism over 5 years; this figure rises by about 1 extra case in 1000 
in those using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years and about 4 extra cases in 1000 
in those using combined HRT (an estrogen and a progestogen) for 5 years. 
About 20 in every 1000 women aged 60–69 years not using HRT develop 
venous thromboembolism over 5 years; this figure rises by about 4 extra cases 
in 1000 in those using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years and about 9 extra cases 
in 1000 in those using combined HRT for 5 years. In women who have 
predisposing factors, such as a personal or family history of deep-vein 
thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, severe varicose veins, obesity, surgery, 
trauma, or prolonged bedrest, the overall risk associated with HRT may 
outweigh the benefit. Travel involving prolonged immobility also increases the 
risk of venous thromboembolism. 
Using HRT increases the risk of breast cancer slightly. The increased risk is 
related to the duration of HRT use and this excess risk disappears within about 
5 years of stopping. The risk of breast cancer is greater with combined HRT 
than with estrogen-only HRT (but as indicated above, estrogen alone may not 
be suitable for women with an intact uterus). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 375 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

In women aged between 50 and 64 years not using HRT, a breast cancer will 
be diagnosed in about 14 out of every 1000 women over 5 years. In women 
using combined HRT for 5 years, there will be about 6 additional cases in 1000; 
in women using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years, there will be about 1.5 
additional cases in 1000. 
In women aged between 50 and 79 years not using HRT, breast cancer will be 
diagnosed in about 31 out of every 1000 women over 5 years. In women using 
combined HRT for 5 years, there will be about 4 additional cases in 1000; in 
women using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years, there will be no additional cases 
of breast cancer diagnosed. 
HRT slightly increases the risk of stroke. About 3 in every 1000 women aged 
50–59 years not using HRT have a stroke over 5 years; this figure rises by 
about 2 additional cases in 1000 in those using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years 
and by about 1 additional case in those using combined HRT for 5 years. 
About 26 in every 1000 women aged 60–69 years not using HRT have a stroke 
over 5 years; this figure rises by about 6 additional cases in 1000 in those using 
an estrogen-only HRT for 5 years and by about 4 additional cases in those 
using combined HRT for 5 years. 
HRT possibly increases the risk of coronary heart disease in the first year of 
use. 
About 3 in every 1000 women aged 50–69 not using HRT will have endometrial 
cancer diagnosed over 5 years; in those using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years, 
there will be about 5 additional cases in 1000. The excess risk of endometrial 
cancer cannot be reliably estimated in those using combined HRT because the 
addition of a progestogen for at least 12 days per month greatly reduces the 
additional risk. 
About 3 in every 1000 women aged 50–69 years not using HRT have ovarian 
cancer diagnosed over 5 years; this figure rises by about 1 additional case in 
1000 in those using estrogen-only HRT for 5 years; the excess risk in women 
using combined HRT is unknown. 
HRT does not provide contraception. If a potentially fertile woman needs to 
use HRT, non-hormonal contraceptive measures are necessary. 
Precautions for patients on HRT undergoing surgery and reasons for stopping 
HRT are the same as those for oral hormonal contraceptives (see notes on 
surgery and Reasons to stop combined oral contraceptives immediately in 
section 18.3.1). 
 
 
 

376 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Ethinylestradiol 
Tablet: 10 micrograms; 50 micrograms. 

Ethinylestradiol is a representative estrogen. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: hormone replacement for menopausal symptoms (in combination with a 
progestogen, if necessary); osteoporosis prophylaxis; palliation in prostate 
cancer; contraception in combination with a progestogen (section 18.3.1). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); estrogen-dependent cancer; active 
thrombophlebitis or thromboembolic disorders or history of recent venous 
thromboembolism (unless already on anticoagulant therapy); undiagnosed 
vaginal bleeding; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); liver disease, Dubin-Johnson 
and Rotor syndromes (where liver function tests have failed to return to 
normal, or monitor closely). 

Precautions: migraine (or migraine-like headache); diabetes mellitus (increased 
risk of heart disease); history of breast nodules of fibrocystic disease 
(increased risk of breast cancer; closely monitor breast status); uterine 
fibroids may increase in size; symptoms of endometriosis may be 
exacerbated; predisposition to thromboembolism (see also introductory 
note above); presence of antiphospholipid antibodies; increased risk of 
gallbladder disease; hypophyseal tumours; porphyria; interactions: 
Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Hormone replacement, by mouth, ADULT (female), 10–20 micrograms daily 
(with a progestogen if necessary; see introductory note above). 

Palliation in prostate cancer, by mouth, ADULT, 0.15–1.5 mg daily. 
Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting, abdominal cramps and bloating, weight 
increase; breast enlargement and tenderness; premenstrual-like syndrome; 
sodium and fluid retention; thromboembolism (see also introductory note 
above); altered blood lipids (may lead to pancreatitis); cholestatic jaundice, 
glucose intolerance; rash and chloasma; changes in libido; depression, 
headache, migraine, dizziness, leg cramps (rule out venous thrombosis); 
vaginal candidiasis; contact lenses may irritate. 

18.5 Insulins and other antidiabetic agents 

Diabetes mellitus is characterized by hyperglycaemia and disturbances of 
carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism. There are two principal types of 
diabetes.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 377 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Type 1 diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is due to a deficiency of 
insulin caused by autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells. Patients 
require administration of insulin.  
Type 2 diabetes or non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus is due to reduced 
secretion of insulin  from the pancreas or to peripheral resistance to the action 
of insulin. Type 2 diabetes may be controlled by diet alone, but often those 
with this form of the disease require administration of oral antidiabetic drugs 
or insulin. The energy and carbohydrate intake must be adequate but obesity 
should be avoided. In type 2 diabetes, obesity is one of the factors associated 
with insulin resistance. Diets high in complex carbohydrate and fibre and low 
in fat are beneficial. Emphasis should be placed on exercise and increased 
activity.  
The aim of treatment is to achieve the best possible control of blood glucose 
concentration and prevent or minimize complications including microvascular 
complications such as retinopathy, albuminuria, and neuropathy. Diabetes 
mellitus is a strong risk factor for cardiovascular disease; other risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease, such as smoking, hypertension, obesity and 
hyperlipidaemia, should also be addressed.  

Insulin  
Appropriate insulin regimens should be worked out for each patient. Insulin 
requirements may be affected by variations in lifestyle (diet and exercise). 
Concomitant use of drugs such as corticosteroids, presence of infections, 
stress, accidental or surgical trauma, puberty and pregnancy (second and third 
trimesters) tend to increase insulin requirements; renal or hepatic impairment 
and some endocrine disorders (for example, Addison disease and 
hypopituitarism) or coeliac disease, usually reduce requirements. In pregnancy, 
insulin requirements should be monitored frequently.  
Insulin must be given by injection because it is inactivated by gastrointestinal 
enzymes. Generally, insulin is given by subcutaneous injection into the upper 
arms, thighs, buttocks, or abdomen. There may be increased absorption from a 
limb site, if the limb is used in strenuous exercise following the injection. It is 
essential to use only syringes calibrated for the particular concentration of 
insulin administered.  
Insulin preparations can be classified according to duration of action after 
subcutaneous injection as follows:  

- those of short duration which have a relatively rapid onset of action, for 
example, soluble or neutral insulin;  

- those with an intermediate action, for example, isophane insulin;  

378 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

- those with a relatively slow onset and long duration of action, for example 
protamine zinc insulin.  

Soluble insulin, when injected subcutaneously, has a rapid onset of action 
(after 30–60 minutes), a peak action between 2 and 4 hours, and a duration of 
action of up to 8 hours. Soluble insulin by the intravenous route is reserved for 
urgent treatment and fine control in serious illness and perioperatively. When 
injected intravenously, soluble insulin has a very short half-life of only about 
5 minutes and its effect disappears within 30 minutes.  
When injected subcutaneously, intermediate-acting insulins take effect within 
approximately 1–2 hours, within a maximal effect at 4–12 hours and a duration 
of action of 16–24 hours. They can be given twice daily (together with short-
acting insulin) or once daily, particularly in elderly patients. Most can be mixed 
with soluble insulin in the syringe, administered together while retaining the 
properties of each component.  
Long-acting insulins [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] have an 
onset of action approximately 4 hours after subcutaneous injection; peak 
activity is between 10 and 20 hours, and duration of action is up to 36 hours. 
Mixed insulin zinc suspension can be classified as either intermediate or long-
acting.  
The duration of action of different insulin preparations varies considerably 
from one patient to another and this needs to be assessed for every individual. 
The type of insulin used, and also its dose and frequency of administration, 
depend on the precise requirements of each patient. For patients with acute 
onset diabetes mellitus, treatment should be started with soluble insulin given 
3 times daily with medium-acting insulin at bedtime. For those less seriously ill, 
treatment is usually started with a mixture of pre-mixed short- and medium-
acting insulins (for example, 30% soluble insulin and 70% isophane insulin) 
given twice daily. The proportions of soluble insulin can be increased in 
patients with excessive post-prandial hyperglycaemia.  
Regimens should be developed by each country.  

Monitoring 

If possible, patients should monitor their own blood glucose concentration 
using blood glucose strips. Blood glucose concentration varies throughout the 
day; diabetics should aim to maintain their blood glucose concentration 
between 4 and 9 mmol/litre for most of the time (ideally, 4–7 mmol/litre 
before meals and less than 9 mmol/litre after meals) while accepting that on 
occasions it will be higher; strenuous efforts should be made to prevent blood-
glucose concentration falling below 4 mmol/litre because of the risk of 
hypoglycaemia. Patients should be advised on how to look for troughs and 
peaks in their own blood glucose and to adjust their insulin dosage accordingly, 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 379 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

but preferably only once or twice a week. Insulin doses are determined on an 
individual basis, by gradually increasing the dose to optimize blood glucose 
concentration while avoiding hypoglycaemia. 
In the absence of blood glucose monitoring strips, urine glucose monitoring 
strips can be used; in fact this is the method of personal choice for many 
patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is less reliable than blood glucose but 
is easier and costs much less. All patients should monitor either blood or urine 
glucose concentration daily.  

Hypoglycaemia 

Hypoglycaemia is a potential complication in all patients treated with insulin or 
less frequently with sulfonylureas. The consequences of hypoglycaemia include 
confusion, seizures, coma, and cerebral infarction. 
Loss of warning of hypoglycaemia is common among insulin-treated patients 
and can be a serious hazard, especially for drivers and those in dangerous 
occupations. It is vital that patients maintain a very tight control on their blood 
glucose in order to manage their condition; not only does tight control lower 
the blood glucose concentration needed to trigger hypoglycaemic symptoms; 
but any increase in the frequency of hypoglycaemic episodes reduces the 
warning symptoms experienced by patients. Beta-blockers can also blunt 
hypoglycaemic awareness (and delay recovery). Some patients report loss of 
hypoglycaemic warning after transfer to human insulin. Although clinical 
studies do not confirm that human insulin decreases hypoglycaemic awareness, 
if a patient believes that human insulin is responsible for loss of warning, it is 
reasonable to revert to animal insulin. To restore warning signs, episodes of 
hypoglycaemia must be reduced to a minimum; this involves appropriate 
adjustment of insulin dose and frequency, and careful attention to the timing 
and quantity of meals and snacks.  
For sporadic physical activity, extra carbohydrate may need to be taken to 
avert hypoglycaemia. Blood glucose should be monitored before, during, and 
after exercise.  
Initial treatment of “mild to moderate” hypoglycaemia involves glucose, 10–
20 g, given by mouth either in liquid form or as granulated sugar (2 teaspoons) 
or sugar lumps (3 lumps). If necessary, this may be repeated after 10–15 
minutes.  
Hypoglycaemia which causes unconsciousness is medical emergency. 
Glucagon [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], a polypeptide 
hormone produced by the alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans, increases 
plasma glucose concentration by mobilizing glycogen stored in the liver. In 
severe hypoglycaemia, if sugar cannot be given by mouth, glucagon can be 
given by injection. Carbohydrates should be given as soon as possible to 

380 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

restore liver glycogen. If injection of glucagon is not effective in 10 minutes, 
intravenous glucose should be given. Note that glucagon is not appropriate for 
the treatment of chronic hypoglycaemia. 
Alternatively, 50 ml of glucose solution, 20% [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List] may be given intravenously into a large vein through a large gauge 
needle; care is required since at this concentration glucose solution is irritant, 
especially if extravasation occurs. Alternatively, 25 ml of glucose solution, 50% 
(section 26.2) may be given, but this higher concentration solution is even 
more irritant and viscous, which makes administration difficult. Glucose 
solution, 10% (section 26.2) may also be used but a larger volume is needed. In 
the case of hypoglycaemia caused by an overdose with a long-acting insulin, 
close monitoring is necessary because further administration may be required. 
Patients whose hypoglycaemia is caused by a sulfonylurea should be 
transferred to hospital because the hypoglycaemic effects of these drugs may 
persist for many hours.  

Driving 

Drivers need to be particularly careful to avoid hypoglycaemia. Insulin-
dependent diabetics should normally check their blood glucose concentration 
before driving and, on long journeys, at intervals of approximately two hours; 
they should ensure that a supply of sugar is always readily available and avoid 
driving if their meal has been delayed. If hypoglycaemia occurs or warning 
signs appear, the driver should stop the vehicle in a safe place, ingest a suitable 
sugar supply and wait until recovery is complete (may be 15 minutes or longer). 
Driving is particularly hazardous when hypoglycaemic awareness is impaired. 

Diabetic ketoacidosis 

Diabetic ketoacidosis is a potentially lethal condition caused by an absolute or 
relative lack of insulin; it commonly occurs when adjustments to insulin dosage 
fail to compensate for increases in insulin requirements, for example, during 
severe infection or a major intercurrent illness. Diabetics ketoacidosis occurs 
mostly in patients with Type 1 diabetes mellitus. It also occurs in Type 2 
diabetics who have a temporary need for insulin. Diabetic ketoacidosis is 
characterized by hyperglycaemia, hyperketonaemia, and acidaemia, leading to 
dehydration and electrolyte disturbances. It is essential that soluble insulin and 
intravenous fluids are readily available for the treatment of this condition. 

Infections 

Infections are more likely to develop in patients with poorly controlled 
diabetes mellitus. These should be treated promptly and effectively to avoid 
diabetic ketoacidosis. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 381 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Surgery 

Particular attention should be paid to insulin requirements when a patient with 
diabetes undergoes surgery, especially when surgery is likely to need an 
intravenous infusion of insulin for longer than 12 hours. Soluble insulin should 
be given in an intravenous infusion of glucose and potassium chloride 
(provided the patient is not hyperkalaemic), and the amount adjusted to 
provide a blood glucose concentration of between 7 and 12 mmol/litre. The 
duration of action of intravenous insulin is only a few minutes, and therefore 
the infusion must not be stopped unless the patient becomes severely 
hypoglycaemic. In non-insulin dependent diabetics, insulin treatment is also 
almost always required during surgery (oral hypoglycaemic drugs having been 
omitted). 

Oral antidiabetic drugs  
Oral antidiabetic (hypoglycaemic) drugs are used for non-insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus in patients who do not respond to dietary adjustment and an 
increase in physical exercise. They are used to supplement the effects of diet 
and exercise, not to replace them. There are various types of oral antidiabetic 
agents, the most commonly used being the sulfonylureas and the biguanide, 
metformin.  
Sulfonylureas act mainly by augmenting insulin secretion and are therefore 
only effective if there is some residual pancreatic beta-cell activity. They may 
occasionally lead to hypoglycaemia 4 hours or more after food. This usually 
indicates excessive dosing and tends to occur more frequently in the elderly 
and with the long-acting sulfonylureas, such as glibenclamide. The 
sulfonylureas have the disadvantage that they may encourage weight gain. They 
should not be used during breastfeeding and caution is required in the elderly 
and those with renal or hepatic insufficiency because of the risk of 
hypoglycaemia. Insulin therapy is generally required during intercurrent illness 
(such as myocardial infarction), coma, infection, and trauma, and also during 
surgery and pregnancy.  
Metformin exerts its effect by decreasing gluconeogenesis and by increasing 
peripheral utilization of glucose. Metformin can only act in the presence of 
endogenous insulin, and therefore is effective only in diabetics with some 
residual functioning pancreatic islet cells. It is used as a first-line treatment in 
overweight non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients and in those for whom 
strict dieting and sulfonylureas have failed to control their disease. 
Gastrointestinal adverse effects are common on initial treatment and may 
persist, particularly when very high doses (such as 3 g daily) are given. In order 
to reduce gastrointestinal effects, treatment should be initiated with a low dose, 
and increased gradually. Metformin may provoke lactic acidosis; this is most 
likely to occur in patients with renal impairment; and thus metformin should 

382 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

not be used in patients with even mild renal impairment. One major advantage 
of metformin is that it does not usually cause hypoglycaemia. It may be used 
with insulin (although the weight gain and hypoglycaemia can be problems, 
weight gain can be minimized if insulin is given at night) or sulfonylureas 
(possibility of increased adverse effects with such combinations remains 
unconfirmed). During medical and surgical emergencies, insulin treatment is 
almost always required; insulin should be substituted for metformin before 
elective surgery and in pregnancy.  

Glibenclamide 
Tablet: 2.5 mg; 5 mg. 

Uses: diabetes mellitus. 
Contraindications: ketoacidosis; porphyria; breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 
Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); the elderly (reduce dose); substitute insulin 
during intercurrent illness severe infection, trauma, surgery, and pregnancy 
(see also introductory note above); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Diabetes mellitus, by mouth, ADULT, initially 5 mg once daily with or 
immediately after breakfast (2.5 mg in the elderly), adjusted according to 
response (maximum, 15 mg daily). 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances and headache (usually mild and 
infrequent), liver disorders; hypersensitivity reactions (usually only in first 
6–8 weeks); rarely erythema multiforme, exfoliative dermatitis, fever, and 
jaundice; hypoglycaemia, particularly in the elderly; rarely blood disorders 
including leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, pancytopenia, 
haemolytic anaemia, and aplastic anaemia. 

Insulin injection (soluble) 
Injection: 40 IU/ml in 10-ml vial; 100 IU/ml in 10-ml vial. 

Uses: diabetes mellitus; diabetic emergencies and during surgery; diabetic 
ketoacidosis or coma. 

Precautions: see note above; renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2); and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 383 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Dose:  

Diabetes mellitus, by subcutaneous injection, by intramuscular injection, by intravenous 
injection or by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, according to individual 
requirements (see also introductory notes above). 

Adverse effects: transient oedema; hypoglycaemia in overdose; rarely 
hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria and rash; local reactions and 
lipoatrophy at injection site. 

Intermediate-acting insulin 
Injection: 40 IU/ml in 10-ml vial; 100 IU/ml in 10-ml vial (as compound 
insulin zinc suspension or isophane insulin). 

Uses: diabetes mellitus. 
Contraindications: intravenous administration. 
Precautions: see note above; renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4); 
pregnancy  (Appendix 2); and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Diabetes mellitus, by subcutaneous injection, ADULT and CHILD, according to 
individual requirements (see also introductory note above). 

Adverse effects: hypoglycaemia in overdose; rarely hypersensitivity reactions, 
including urticaria and rash; local reactions and lipoatrophy at injection site. 

Metformin 
Tablet: 500 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: diabetes mellitus. 
Contraindications: renal impairment (Appendix 4); ketoacidosis; risk of tissue 
hypoxia, caused by, for example, sepsis, respiratory failure, recent 
myocardial infarction, or hepatic impairment (withdraw treatment); use of 
iodine-containing X-ray contrast media (do not restart metformin until renal 
function returns to normal); use of general anaesthesia (suspend metformin 
on the morning of surgery and restart when renal function returns to 
normal); alcohol dependence; pregnancy (Appendix 2). 

Precautions: monitor renal function before treatment and once or twice 
annually (more frequently in the elderly or if deterioration suspected); 
substitute insulin during severe infection, trauma, surgery and pregnancy 
(see also introductory note above); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

384 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Dose:  
Diabetes mellitus, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 10 years, initially 500 mg 
with breakfast for at least 1 week then 500 mg with breakfast and evening 
meal for at least 1 week, then 500 mg with breakfast, lunch, and evening 
meal or 850 mg every 12 hours with or after food; usual maximum, 2 g daily 
in divided doses. 

Adverse effects: anorexia, nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea (usually transient), 
abdominal pain, metallic taste; rarely lactic acidosis (most likely in patients 
with renal impairment; discontinue); decreased vitamin B12 absorption, 
erythema, pruritus and urticaria; hepatitis also reported. 

18.6 Ovulation inducers 

The anti-estrogen, clomifene is used in the treatment of female infertility due 
to disturbances in ovulation. It induces gonadotrophin release by occupying 
estrogen receptors in the hypothalamus, thereby interfering with feedback 
mechanisms. Patients should be carefully counselled and should be made fully 
aware of the potential adverse effects, including a risk of multiple pregnancy 
(rarely more than twins), of this treatment. Most patients who are going to 
respond to treatment will do so to the first course; three courses should be 
adequate; long-term cyclical therapy (more than six cycles) is not 
recommended as it may increase the risk of ovarian cancer. 

Clomifene 
Tablet: 50 mg (citrate). 

Clomifene citrate is a complementary list medicine for fertility treatment. 

Uses: anovulatory infertility. 
Contraindications: hepatic disease (Appendix 5); ovarian cysts; hormone 
dependent tumours or uterine bleeding of undetermined cause; pregnancy 
(exclude before treatment; Appendix 2). 

Precautions: visual disturbances (discontinue and initiate eye examination) and 
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (discontinue treatment immediately); 
polycystic ovary syndrome (cysts may enlarge during treatment); uterine 
fibroids, ectopic pregnancy, incidence of multiple births increased (consider 
ultrasound monitoring); breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 385 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Dose:  
Anovulatory infertility, by mouth, ADULT (female), 50 mg daily for 5 days, 
starting within 5 days of onset of menstruation, preferably on the second 
day, or at any time if cycles have ceased; a second course of 100 mg daily 
for 5 days may be given in the absence of ovulation. 

Adverse effects: visual disturbances, ovarian hyperstimulation, hot flushes, 
abdominal discomfort, occasional nausea and vomiting, depression, 
insomnia, breast tenderness, headache, intermenstrual spotting, 
menorrhagia, endometriosis, convulsions, weight gain, rash, dizziness, hair 
loss. 

18.7 Progestogens 

Progesterone is a hormone secreted by the corpus luteum whose actions 
include induction of secretory changes in the endometrium, relaxation of the 
uterine smooth muscle, and production of changes in the vaginal epithelium. 
Progesterone is relatively inactive following oral administration and produces 
local reactions at the site of injection. This has led to the development of 
synthetic progestogens including levonorgestrel (sections 18.3.1 and 18.3.5), 
norethisterone, and medroxyprogesterone.  
Where endometriosis requires drug treatment, it may respond to a synthetic 
progestogen given on a continuous basis. A progestogen may also be used for 
the treatment of severe dysmenorrhoea but where contraception is also 
required, the best choice is a combined oral contraceptive (see section 18.3.1). 
In postmenopausal women receiving long-term estrogen therapy for hormone 
replacement, a progestogen needs to be added for women with an intact uterus 
to prevent hyperplasia of the endometrium (section 18.4). Progestogens have 
been used for the treatment of menorrhagia, but they are not as effective as 
tranexamic acid [not included on the 15th WHO Model List]; mefenamic acid 
[not included on the 15th WHO Model List] is particularly useful where 
dysmenorrhoea is also a problem. Medroxyprogesterone is also used in the 
treatment of endometrial cancer. 
Progestogens are also used in combined oral contraceptives and progestogen-
only contraceptives (section 18.3.1). 
 
 
 
 

386 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
Tablet: 5 mg. 

Medroxyprogesterone acetate is a complementary list progestogenic medicine. 

Uses: endometriosis; dysfunctional uterine bleeding; secondary amenorrhoea; 
endometrial cancer; contraception (section 18.3.2); adjunct in hormone 
replacement therapy (section 18.4). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); hormone-dependent breast or 
genital neoplasms; undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; hepatic impairment or 
active liver disease (Appendix 5); severe arterial disease; porphyria. 

Precautions: small increase in possible risk of breast cancer; migraine; 
depression; thromboembolic or coronary vascular disease; diabetes mellitus; 
trophoblastic disease; hypertension; renal disease (Appendix 4); 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Mild to moderate endometriosis, by mouth, ADULT (female), 10 mg 3 times daily 
for 90 consecutive days, beginning on day 1 of cycle. 

Dysfunctional uterine bleeding, by mouth, ADULT (female), 2.5–10 mg daily for 
5–10 days, beginning on day 16 to 21 of cycle for 2 cycles. 

Secondary amenorrhoea, by mouth, ADULT (female), 2.5–10 mg daily for 5–10 
days beginning on day 16 to 21 of cycle for 3 cycles. 

Endometrial cancer, by mouth, ADULT (female), 200–400 mg daily. 
Adverse effects: acne, urticaria, fluid retention, weight gain, gastrointestinal 
disturbances, changes in libido, breast discomfort, premenstrual symptoms, 
irregular menstrual cycles; depression, insomnia, somnolence, headache, 
alopecia, hirsutism; anaphylactoid reactions; rarely jaundice; breast cancer 
(small increased risk of breast cancer). 

Norethisterone 
Tablet: 5 mg. 

Uses: endometriosis; menorrhagia; severe dysmenorrhoea; contraception 
(section 18.3.2); hormone replacement therapy (section 18.4). 

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; 
hepatic impairment or active liver disease (Appendix 5); severe arterial 
disease; breast or genital tract cancer; porphyria; history of idiopathic 
jaundice, severe pruritus, or pemphigoid gestationis in pregnancy. 

Precautions: epilepsy; migraine; diabetes mellitus; hypertension; cardiac or 
renal disease (Appendix 4) and those susceptible to thromboembolism; 
depression; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 387 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Dose:  
Endometriosis, by mouth, ADULT (female), 10 mg daily starting on day 5 of cycle 
(increased to 20–25 mg daily if spotting occurs, reduced once bleeding has 
stopped). 

Menorrhagia, by mouth, ADULT (female), 5 mg 3 times daily for 10 days to stop 
bleeding; followed  by 5 mg twice daily from day 19 to day 26 of cycle to 
prevent bleeding. 

Dysmenorrhoea, by mouth, ADULT (female), 5 mg 2–3 times daily from day 5 to 
day 24 for 3–4 cycles. 

Adverse effects: acne, urticaria, fluid retention, weight increase, 
gastrointestinal disturbances, changes in libido, breast discomfort, 
premenstrual symptoms, irregular menstrual cycles, depression, insomnia, 
somnolence, headache, dizziness, alopecia, hirsutism, anaphylactoid-like 
reactions; exacerbation of epilepsy and migraine; rarely jaundice. 

18.8 Thyroid hormones and antithyroid medicines 

Thyroid hormones  
Thyroid agents are natural or synthetic agents containing levothyroxine 
(thyroxine) or liothyronine (tri-iodothyronine). Their principal effect is to 
increase the metabolic rate. They also exert a cardiostimulatory effect which 
may be the result of a direct action on the heart.   
Thyroid hormones are used in hypothyroidism (myxoedema) and also in 
diffuse non-toxic goitre, Hashimoto thyroiditis (lymphadenoid goitre) and 
thyroid carcinoma. Neonatal hypothyroidism requires prompt treatment for 
normal development.   
Levothyroxine sodium (thyroxine sodium) is the treatment of choice for 
maintenance therapy. It is almost completely absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract but the full effects are not seen until up to 1–3 weeks 
after beginning therapy; there is a slow response to dose change and effects 
may persist for several weeks after withdrawal. Dosage of levothyroxine in 
infants and children for congenital hypothyroidism and juvenile myxoedema 
should be titrated according to clinical response, growth assessment, and 
measurement of plasma thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone.   

Antithyroid medicines    
Antithyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil and carbimazole [not included on 
the 15th WHO Model List] are used in the management of thyrotoxicosis. 
They are also used to prepare the patient for thyroidectomy. They are usually 

388 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

well tolerated, with mild leukopenia or rashes developing in only a few per cent 
of cases, usually during the first 6–8 weeks of therapy. During this time, the 
blood count should be checked every 2 weeks or if a sore throat or other signs 
of infection develop. The drugs are generally given in a high dose in the first 
instance until the patient becomes euthyroid; the dose may then be gradually 
reduced to a maintenance dose which is continued for 12–18 months, followed 
by monitoring to identify relapse. There is a lag time of some 2 weeks between 
the achievement of biochemical euthyroidism and clinical euthyroidism. Beta-
adrenoceptor antagonists (beta-blockers), usually propranolol, may be used as 
a short-term adjunct to antithyroid drugs to control symptoms but their use in 
heart failure associated with thyrotoxicosis is controversial.    
If necessary, treatment can be given, in pregnancy but antithyroid drugs cross 
the placenta and in high doses may cause fetal goitre and hypothyroidism. The 
lowest dose that will control the hyperthyroid state should be used 
(requirements in Graves disease tend to fall during pregnancy). 
Propylthiouracil appears in breast milk but its use does not preclude 
breastfeeding as long as neonatal development is closely monitored and the 
lowest effective dose is used.    
If surgery (partial thyroidectomy) is contemplated, it may be necessary to give 
potassium iodine for 10–14 days in addition to antithyroid drugs to assist 
control and reduce vascularity of the thyroid. Potassium iodine should not be 
used for long-term treatment since its antithyroid action tends to diminish. In 
patients in whom drug therapy fails to achieve long-term remissions definitive 
treatment with surgery or (increasingly) radioactive iodine is preferable.  

Levothyroxine 
Tablet: 50 micrograms; 100 micrograms (sodium salt). 

Uses: hypothyroidism. 
Contraindications: thyrotoxicosis. 
Precautions: cardiovascular disorders (myocardial insufficiency or myocardial 
infarction); hypopituitarism or predisposition to adrenal insufficiency (must 
be corrected by a corticosteroid prior to treatment with levothyroxine); the 
elderly; long-standing hypothyroidism; diabetes insipidus or diabetes 
mellitus (may need to increase dose of insulin or oral antidiabetic drug); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2), breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Hypothyroidism, by mouth, ADULT, initially 50–100 micrograms daily  
(25–50 micrograms for those over 50 years) before breakfast, increased by 
25–50 micrograms every 3–4 weeks until normal metabolism maintained; 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 389 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

usual maintenance dose, 100–200 micrograms daily; (in cardiac disease, 
initially 25 micrograms daily or 50 micrograms on alternate days, adjusted in 
steps of 25 micrograms every 4 weeks). 

Congenital hypothyroidism and juvenile myxoedema (see also introductory 
note above), by mouth, NEONATE up to 1 month, initially 5–
10 micrograms/kg daily, (5 micrograms/kg daily in infants and children 
over 1 month), adjusted in steps of 25 micrograms every 2–4 weeks, until 
mild toxic symptoms appear, then reduce dose slightly. 

Adverse effects: (usually with excessive dose) anginal pain, arrhythmias, 
palpitations, tachycardia, skeletal muscle cramps, diarrhoea, vomiting, 
tremors, restlessness, excitability, insomnia, headache, flushing, sweating, 
excessive loss of weight and muscular weakness. 

Potassium iodide 
Tablet: 60 mg. 

Uses: thyrotoxicosis (pre-operative treatment); sporotrichosis, subcutaneous 
phycomycosis (section 6.3). 

Contraindications: breastfeeding (Appendix 3); long-term treatment. 
Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2); children. 
Dose:  
Pre-operative management of thyrotoxicosis, by mouth, ADULT, 60–180 mg 
daily. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions including coryza-like symptoms, 
headache, lacrimation, conjunctivitis, pain in salivary glands, laryngitis, 
bronchitis, and rash; on prolonged treatment, depression, insomnia, and 
impotence, goitre in infants of mothers taking iodides. 

Propylthiouracil 
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Propylthiouracil is a representative antithyroid drug. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: hyperthyroidism. 
Precautions: large goitre; pregnancy and breastfeeding (see also introductory 
note above; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (see also introductory note above; 
Appendix 3); hepatic impairment (withdraw treatment if hepatic function 
deteriorates — fatal reactions reported; Appendix 5); renal impairment 
(reduce dosage; Appendix 4). 

390 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



18. Hormones, other endocrine medicines and contraceptives 

Dose:  

Hyperthyroidism, by mouth, ADULT, 300–600 mg daily until patient becomes 
euthyroid; dose may then be gradually reduced to a maintenance dose of 
50–150 mg daily. 

PATIENT ADVICE. Warn patient to tell doctor immediately if either sore throat, 
mouth ulcers, bruising, fever, malaise, or non-specific illness occurs. 

Adverse effects: nausea, rash, pruritus, arthralgia, headache; rarely alopecia, 
cutaneous vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, aplastic anaemia, lupus 
erythematosus-like syndrome, jaundice, hepatitis, hepatic necrosis, 
encephalopathy, and nephritis. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 391 



19. Immunologicals 

 

 

 

SECTION 19:  
Immunologicals 

19.1 Diagnostic agents 393 

19.2 Sera and immunoglobulins 394 

19.3 Vaccines 398 

392 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Active immunity 
Active immunity may be induced by the administration of micro-organisms or 
their products which act as antigens to induce antibodies to confer a protective 
immune response in the host. Vaccination may consist of: 
(a) a live, attenuated form of a virus or bacteria,  
(b) inactivated preparations of the virus or bacteria,  
(c) extracts of, or detoxified, exotoxins.  

Live, attenuated vaccines usually confer immunity with a single dose which is 
of long duration. Inactivated vaccines may require a series of injections in the 
first instance to produce an adequate antibody response and in most cases, 
require reinforcing (booster) doses. The duration of immunity varies from 
months to many years. Extracts of, or detoxified, exotoxins require a primary 
series of injections followed by reinforcing doses. 

Passive immunity 
Passive immunity is conferred by injecting preparations made from the plasma 
of immune individuals with adequate levels of antibody to the disease for 
which protection is sought. Treatment has to be given soon after exposure to 
be effective. This immunity lasts only a few weeks but passive immunization 
can be repeated when necessary. 

19.1 Diagnostic agents 

A positive tuberculin test indicates previous exposure to mycobacterial 
antigens through infection with one of the tubercle bacilli, or BCG vaccination. 
However, the tuberculin test has limited diagnostic value. It does not 
distinguish between tuberculosis and other mycobacterial infections, between 
active and quiescent disease, or between acquired infection and seroconversion 
induced by BCG vaccination.  

Tuberculin, purified protein derivative (PPD) 
Injection. 

All tuberculins should comply with the WHO Requirements for Tuberculins (Revised 
1985). In: WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization Thirty-sixth report. 
WHO Technical Report Series, No.745, 1987, Annex 1. 

Uses: test for hypersensitivity to tuberculoprotein. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 393 



19. Immunologicals 

Contraindications: should not be used within 4 weeks of receiving a live viral 
vaccine. 

Precautions: the elderly; malnutrition; viral or bacterial infections (including 
HIV and severe tuberculosis); malignant disease; corticosteroid or 
immunosuppressant therapy (diminished sensitivity to tuberculin); avoid 
contact with open cuts, abraded or diseased skin, eyes, or mouth. 

Dose:  
NOTE. National recommendations may vary. 

Test for hypersensitivity to tuberculoprotein, by intradermal injection, ADULT and 
CHILD, 5 or 10 IU (1 unit in hypersensitive patients or if tuberculosis is 
suspected). 

ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: occasionally nausea, headache, malaise, rash; immediate local 
reactions (more common in atopic patients); rarely vesicular or ulcerating 
local reactions, regional adenopathy, and fever. 

19.2 Sera and immunoglobulins 

Antibodies of human origin are usually termed immunoglobulins. Material 
prepared from animals is called antiserum. Because of serum sickness and other 
allergic-type reactions that may follow injections of antisera, this therapy has 
been replaced wherever possible by the use of immunoglobulins. 
All immunoglobulins and antisera should comply with WHO requirements for 
blood and plasma products. 

Contraindications and precautions 

Anaphylaxis, although rare, can occur and epinephrine (adrenaline) must 
always be immediately available during immunization (see section 3). 
Immunoglobulins may interfere with the immune response to live virus 
vaccines (see section 19.3) which should normally be given either at least 
3 weeks before or at least 3 months after administration of an immunoglobulin. 

Adverse reactions 

Local reactions, including pain and tenderness, may occur at the site of an 
intramuscular injection. Hypersensitivity reactions may also occur including, rarely, 
anaphylaxis. Following an intravenous injection, systemic reactions including fever, 
chills, facial flushing, headache, and nausea may occur, particularly following 
high rates of infusion. Hypersensitivity reactions may also occur including, 
rarely, anaphylaxis. 

394 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Anti-D immunoglobulin (human) 
Injection: 250 micrograms in single-dose vial. 

Anti-D immunoglobulin is prepared from plasma with a high titre of anti-D antibody. 
It is available to prevent a rhesus-negative mother from forming antibodies to fetal 
rhesus-positive cells which may pass into the maternal circulation. The aim is to protect 
any subsequent child against haemolytic disease of the newborn. It should be 
administered following any potentially sensitizing episode (for example, abortion, 
miscarriage, or still-birth), ideally immediately or within 72 hours of the episode but 
even if a longer period has elapsed, it may still give protection and should be used. The 
dose of anti-D immunoglobulin given depends on the level of exposure to rhesus-
positive blood. The injection of anti-D immunoglobulin is not effective once the 
mother has formed anti-D antibodies. It is also given following transfusion of Rh0 (D) 
incompatible blood.   

Plasma fractions should comply with the Requirements for the Collection, Processing 
and Quality Control of Blood, Blood Components and Plasma Derivatives (Revised 
1992). WHO Technical Report Series No 840, 1994, Annex 2. 

Uses: prevention of formation of antibodies to rhesus-positive blood cells in 
rhesus-negative patients.   

Contraindications: see introductory notes; also known hypersensitivity to  
anti-D immunoglobulin. 

Precautions: see introductory notes; rhesus-positive patients receiving 
treatment for blood disorders; rhesus-negative patients with anti-D 
antibodies in their serum; interactions: Appendix 1.   

RUBELLA VACCINE. Rubella vaccine may be administered in the 
postpartum period at the same time as anti-D immunoglobulin, but only if 
separate syringes and contralateral sites are used. If blood is transfused, the 
antibody response to the vaccine may be inhibited (measure rubella 
antibodies after 8 weeks and revaccinate if necessary).   

Dose: 
NOTE. National recommendations may vary. 

Following birth of a rhesus-positive infant to a rhesus-negative mother, by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT, 250 micrograms immediately or within 
72 hours of birth (see also introductory note above). 

Following any potentially sensitizing episode (for example, amniocentesis, still-
birth), by intramuscular injection, ADULT, up to 20 weeks’ gestation, 
250 micrograms per episode (after 20 weeks, 500 micrograms) immediately 
or within 72 hours (see also introductory note above). 

Following Rh0 (D) incompatible blood transfusion, by intramuscular injection, 
ADULT, 10–20 micrograms per ml transfused rhesus-positive blood. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 395 



19. Immunologicals 

Antitetanus immunoglobulin (human) 
Injection: 500 IU in vial. 

Antitetanus immunoglobulin of human origin is a preparation containing 
immunoglobulins derived from the plasma of adults immunized with tetanus toxoid. It 
is used for the management of tetanus-prone wounds in addition to wound toilet and, if 
appropriate, antibacterial prophylaxis and adsorbed tetanus vaccination (see 
section 19.3).    

Plasma fractions should comply with the WHO Requirements for the Collection, 
Processing and Quality Control of Blood, Blood Components and Plasma Derivatives 
(Revised 1992). WHO Technical Report Series No 840, 1994, Annex 2.  

Uses: passive immunization against tetanus as part of the management of 
tetanus-prone wounds. 

Contraindications: see introductory notes.   
Precautions: see introductory notes.   
TETANUS VACCINE. If schedule requires tetanus vaccine and antitetanus 
immunoglobulin to be administered at the same time, they should be administered 
using separate syringes and separate sites.    
Dose:  
NOTE. National recommendations may vary.  

Management of tetanus-prone wounds, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and 
CHILD, 250 IU, increased to 500 IU if wound older than 24 hours or there 
is risk of heavy contamination, or following burns (see also section 19.3).   

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Antivenom immunoglobulins 
Injection: exact type to be defined locally. 

Acute envenoming from snakes or spiders is common in many parts of the world. The 
bite may cause local and systemic effects. 

Local effects include pain, swelling, bruising, and tender enlargement of regional lymph 
nodes. Wounds should be cleaned and pain may be relieved by analgesics (see 
section 2.1).  

If significant amounts of toxin are absorbed after a snake bite, this may result in early 
anaphylactoid symptoms such as transient hypotension, angioedema, abdominal colic, 
diarrhoea, and vomiting, followed by persistent or recurrent hypotension and ECG 
abnormalities. Spontaneous systemic bleeding, coagulopathy, adult respiratory distress 
syndrome, and acute renal failure may also occur. Early anaphylactoid symptoms may 
be treated with epinephrine (adrenaline). Snake antivenom immunoglobulins are the 
only specific treatment available but they can produce severe adverse reactions. They 
are generally only used if there is a clear indication of systemic involvement or severe 
local involvement or, in regions where supplies are not limited, in patients at high risk 
of systemic or severe local involvement.  

396 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Spider bites may cause either necrotic or neurotoxic syndromes depending on the 
species involved. Supportive and symptomatic treatment is required and in the case of 
necrotic syndrome, surgical repair may be necessary. Spider antivenom 
immunoglobulin, suitable for the species involved, may prevent symptoms if 
administered as soon as possible after envenomation.  

NOTE. There are many antivenom immunoglobulins, each containing specific venom-
neutralizing globulins. It is important that the specific antivenom immunoglobulin 
suitable for the species causing the envenomation is administered. 

Uses: treatment of snake bites and spider bites. 
Precautions: resuscitation facilities should be immediately available. 
Dose:  

Depends on the specific antivenom used; consult manufacturer’s literature. 
Adverse effects: serum sickness; anaphylaxis with hypotension, dyspnoea, 
urticaria, and shock. 

Diphtheria antitoxin 
Injection: 10 000 IU; 20 000 IU in vial. 

Diphtheria antitoxin is prepared from the plasma or serum of healthy horses 
immunized against diphtheria toxin or diphtheria toxoid. It is used for passive 
immunization in suspected cases of diphtheria without waiting for bacterial 
confirmation of the infection. A test dose should be given initially to exclude 
hypersensitivity. Diphtheria antitoxin is not used for prophylaxis of diphtheria because 
of the risk of hypersensitivity. 

Uses: passive immunization in suspected cases of diphtheria.    
Precautions: initial test dose to exclude hypersensitivity; observation required 
after full dose (epinephrine (adrenaline) and resuscitation facilities should be 
available).   

Dose:  
NOTE. National recommendations may vary.    

Passive immunization in suspected diphtheria (see Precautions), by intramuscular 
injection, ADULT and CHILD, 10 000–30 000 IU in mild to moderate cases; 
40 000–100 000 IU in severe cases (doses of more than 40 000 IU should 
be given in divided doses, the first portion by intramuscular injection, followed 
by the bulk of the dose by intravenous injection after an interval of   
0.5–2 hours).    

Adverse effects: anaphylaxis with urticaria, hypotension, dyspnoea, and shock; 
serum sickness up to 12 days after injection. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 397 



19. Immunologicals 

Rabies immunoglobulin 
Injection: 150 IU/ml in vial. 

Rabies immunoglobulin is a preparation containing immunoglobulins derived from 
the plasma of adults immunized with rabies vaccine. It is used as part of the 
management of potential rabies following exposure of an unimmunized individual to an 
animal in or from a high-risk country. It should be administered as soon as possible 
after exposure without waiting for confirmation that the animal is rabid. The site of the 
bite should be washed with soapy water and the rabies immunoglobulin should be 
infiltrated in and around the site of the bite. In addition, rabies vaccine (see section 19.3) 
should be administered at a different site.  

Plasma fractions should comply with the WHO Requirements for the Collection, 
Processing and Quality Control of Blood, Blood Components and Plasma Derivatives 
(Revised 1992). WHO Technical Report Series No 840, 1994, Annex 2. 

Uses: passive immunization either post-exposure or in suspected exposure to 
rabies in high-risk countries in unimmunized individuals (in conjunction 
with rabies vaccine). 

Contraindications: see introductory notes; also avoid repeat doses after vaccine 
treatment initiated; intravenous administration. 

Precautions: see introductory notes. 
RABIES VACCINE. If schedule requires rabies vaccine and rabies immunoglobulin to 
be administered at the same time, they should be administered using separate syringes 
and separate sites. 
Dose:   
NOTE. National recommendations may vary. 

Passive immunization against rabies (post-exposure or following suspected 
exposure) by infiltration, ADULT and CHILD, 20 IU/kg in and around the 
cleansed wound; if wound is not visible or has healed, or if infiltration of 
whole volume is not possible, give remainder by intramuscular injection into the 
anterolateral thigh. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

19.3 Vaccines 

Selection of vaccines from the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines by 
individual countries should be made after consideration of international 
recommendations, epidemiology, and national priorities.  
National immunization schedules may vary from those presented in this 
edition of the WHO Model Formulary. 

398 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

All vaccines should comply with WHO recommendations for the production, 
control, and evaluation of vaccines and other biological substances; these 
recommendations provide guidance for national regulatory authorities and for 
vaccine manufacturers and are available from the WHO web site: 
www.who.int/biologicals/publications/trs/areas/en/index.html.  
WHO publishes regularly-updated advice on vaccines against diseases of 
international relevance; the advice deals primarily with large-scale 
immunization programmes. The advice is available from the WHO web site: 
www.who.int/immunization/documents/positionpapers_intro/en/index.html. 
The Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) regularly 
reports on a range of issues, including vaccine research and immunization 
against all vaccine-preventable diseases. The current SAGE reports and 
recommendations are also available from the WHO web site: 
www.who.int/immunization/sage_conclusions/en/index.html. 
The Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety (GACVS) reports on 
vaccine safety issues. The current GACVS reports are available via the WHO 
web site: www.who.int/vaccine_safety/en/. 
The WHO web site also has links to further information about the use of 
vaccines; go to: www.who.int/immunization/en.  
Vaccines may consist of a live attenuated or inactivated form of a virus or 
bacteria, or an extract of or detoxified exotoxin produced by a micro-organism. 
Some inactivated vaccines are adsorbed onto an adjuvant to enhance the 
antibody response. 

Adverse effects 

Vaccines are generally both effective and safe. Adverse reactions are usually 
mild and commonly include injection site reactions (such as pain, Erythema, 
and inflammation), fever, and malaise. These reactions generally occur within 
1–2 days of immunization. However, the systemic symptoms that may arise 
with the measles or the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine occur  
5–12 days after vaccination. Serious reactions are rare, but hypersensitivity 
reactions including anaphylaxis (see section 3) have been reported. If a serious 
adverse event occurs (such as severe allergy or anaphylaxis) following a dose of 
any vaccine, subsequent doses should not be given. 
In addition, certain components of the vaccine (for example, aluminium 
adjuvant, antibiotics, excipients, or preservatives) occasionally cause reactions. 
Some vaccines are prepared using hens’ eggs; caution is required when the 
patient is know to have egg sensitivity. Vaccines are contraindicated in 
individuals with known severe hypersensitivity to any component; consult the 
manufacturer’s literature for the specific composition of individual vaccines.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 399 



19. Immunologicals 

HIV infection 

The likelihood of successful immunization is reduced in some HIV-infected 
individuals, but the risk of serious adverse effects remains low, except for 
BCG.  Specific precautions and contraindications in HIV infection are given in 
the listings for the individual vaccines. 

Live vaccines 

When 2 live virus vaccines are required (and are not available as a combined 
preparation) they should be given either simultaneously at different sites or 
with an interval of at least 4 weeks.  
Live vaccines should not be routinely administered to pregnant women 
because of the possible harm to the fetus but where there is significant risk of 
exposure, the need for immunization may outweigh any possible risk to the 
fetus.  

Postimmunization fever 

If fever develops after childhood immunization, the infant can be given a dose 
of paracetamol (60 mg), followed if necessary by a second dose 4–6 hours later. 
If fever persists after the second dose, medical advice should be sought (see 
also section 2.1).  
Fever from any cause, including immunization, increases risk of febrile 
convulsions when there is a personal or family history of febrile convulsions. 
When immunization of these children is recommended, advice on prevention 
of fever should be given before administration of the vaccine. 

BCG vaccine 
Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, transmitted 
from person to person through respiratory contact. Where tuberculosis remains highly 
prevalent, routine immunization of infants within the first year of life with BCG 
vaccine, derived from bacillus Calmette-Guérin (an attenuated strain of Mycobacterium 
bovis) reduces the incidence of meningeal and miliary tuberculosis in early childhood. 
The efficacy against pulmonary tuberculosis is doubtful; the mainstay of the 
tuberculosis control programme is case-finding and treatment. 

WHO recommends that all infants in highly endemic countries should receive a single 
dose of BCG vaccine as soon as possible after birth. In low-endemic countries, BCG 
vaccine can be given to infants and children at high risk of tuberculosis exposure. 
Infants known to be HIV-infected (with or without symptoms) should not receive 
BCG vaccination. Infants born to known HIV-infected mothers should only be 
immunized if no signs or symptoms suggestive of HIV infection are present and after 
taking into consideration the likelihood of the infant being infected with HIV, and the 
potential risk of exposure to tuberculosis. If HIV infection status can be established 

400 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

with early virological testing, BCG vaccine can be administered once HIV infection has 
been ruled out. 

Infants exposed to smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis shortly after birth should not 
receive BCG vaccination until completion of 6 months of prophylactic isoniazid 
treatment (see section 6.2.4).  

BCG vaccine may be given at the same time as other live vaccines, but if not given 
simultaneously they should be given 4 weeks apart. However, when BCG vaccine is 
given to infants, there is no need to delay routine primary immunizations. 

Powder for injection, live bacteria of a strain derived from the bacillus of 
Calmette and Guérin. 

Uses: active immunization against tuberculosis; see also section 6.2.4. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also HIV infection (see introductory 
note above), immunodeficiency, patients receiving immunosuppressive 
therapy; generalized septic skin conditions. 

Precautions: pregnancy (Appendix 2); eczema, scabies (vaccine site must be 
lesion-free); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Immunization against tuberculosis, by intradermal injection, INFANTS up to 
12 months, 0.05 ml.   

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also rarely lymphadenitis, local 
ulceration, disseminated BCG infection in immunodeficient individuals, and 
osteitis. 

Cholera vaccine 
Cholera is caused by Vibrio cholerae and is closely associated with poor sanitation. It is 
transmitted by faecal contamination of water and food; person-to-person transmission 
is uncommon. WHO recommends the use of cholera vaccines as a preventative 
measure but not for containing an outbreak. Immunization with inactivated oral 
vaccine should be considered for populations at imminent risk of a cholera epidemic. 
In emergency situations, high-risk populations, such as people in crowded refugee 
camps and urban slums, should be immunized. Immunization for travellers is only 
recommended for individuals at increased risk of exposure, particularly emergency relief 
and health-care workers in refugee situations. 

Two types of oral cholera vaccines (live and inactivated) are effective for immunization, 
but only the inactivated vaccine is currently commercially available. Protection is 
obtained 7 days after completing the course and lasts for at least 6 months, but has not 
been demonstrated in children less than 2 years of age.  

Injectable cholera vaccine is not recommended by WHO because it provides unreliable 
protection and does not prevent transmission of infection. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 401 



19. Immunologicals 

Oral suspension, inactivated (WC/rBS) cholera virus. 
NOTE. Formulations vary between products and manufacturers and dilution may be 
required before administration; consult manufacturer’s literature 

Uses: active immunization against cholera. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also hypersensitivity to previous 
dose. 

Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Immunization against cholera, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, 
2 doses, separated by 1 week. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also mild transient gastrointestinal 
disturbances reported. 

Diphtheria vaccine 
Diphtheria is a bacterial infection caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae and is transmitted 
from person to person through close physical and respiratory contact. Diphtheria 
vaccine is a formaldehyde-inactivated preparation of the diphtheria toxin, adsorbed 
onto a mineral carrier to increase its antigenicity and to reduce adverse reactions.  

Diphtheria vaccine is given as part of primary immunization schedules in fixed-dose 
combinations with tetanus, or tetanus and pertussis vaccines. Combinations with other 
antigens such as Haemophilus influenzae type b, poliomyelitis, and hepatitis B vaccines are 
available in some countries. Immunization against diphtheria should be considered for 
health-care workers who are at risk of occupational exposure to Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae. 

For primary immunization in infants, WHO recommends a 3-dose schedule of a three -
component preparation of diphtheria vaccine in combination with pertussis and 
tetanus vaccines also known as the DTP or the 3-in-1 vaccine. The first dose is given 
at 6 weeks of age, followed by 2 further doses, each at minimum intervals of 4 weeks 
apart.  For previously unimmunized children, aged between 1 and 6 years, the 
recommended schedule is 2 doses, given 2 months apart, and a third dose after  
6–12 months. In non-endemic countries, at least 1 booster dose should be given after 
completion of the primary series. Many national immunization programmes include  
1–2  booster doses, for example, one at 2 years of age and a second at 4–7 years of age.   

The two-component diphtheria with tetanus vaccine exists in 2 forms. The form containing 
a low dose of diphtheria toxoid is associated with less frequent local reactions in adults 
and older children than the standard-dose diphtheria preparation. Low-dose diphtheria 
with tetanus should be used for adults and children aged 7 years and older. When 
tetanus prophylaxis is needed following tetanus injuries, combined diphtheria and 
tetanus preparations should be used rather than tetanus alone to promote immunity 
against diphtheria (see also Tetanus vaccine). 

402 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis vaccine (DTP)  
Injection, diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine adsorbed 
onto a mineral carrier.  

NOTE. Available with either an acellular pertussis component or a whole cell pertussis 
component (see also under Pertussis). 

Uses: active immunization against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes; whole cell pertussis component 
associated with more frequent minor adverse effects than acellular pertussis 
component; the frequency increases with age and number of injections and 
so vaccines containing whole cell pertussis are not recommended for 
adolescents and adults. 

Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus,  
by intramuscular injection, INFANT from 6 weeks of age, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml 
with an interval of not less than 4 weeks between each dose; CHILD  
1–6 years of age, 2 doses, each of 0.5 ml separated by an interval of 
2 months, followed by a third dose after 6–12 months.  

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; minor adverse effects are more 
frequent with vaccines containing a whole cell pertussis component (see 
also under Pertussis). 

Diphtheria (standard dose) and tetanus vaccine (for children under 7 years)  

Injection, diphtheria (standard dose) and tetanus toxoids adsorbed onto a 
mineral carrier.  

Uses: active immunization of children under 7 years against diphtheria and 
tetanus. 

Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against diphtheria and tetanus, by 
intramuscular injection, CHILD under 7 years, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, with an 
interval of not less than 4 weeks between each dose.  

Reinforcing immunization of children against diphtheria and tetanus, by 
intramuscular injection, CHILD under 10 years,1 dose of 0.5 ml at least 3 years 
after completion of primary course of diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus 
vaccine, or diphtheria and tetanus vaccine. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 403 



19. Immunologicals 

Diphtheria (low dose) and tetanus vaccine  

Injection, diphtheria (low dose) and tetanus toxoid adsorbed onto a mineral 
carrier.  

Uses: active immunization of adults and children aged 7 years and over against 
diphtheria and tetanus (see note above). 

Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Primary immunization of unimmunized adults and children aged 7 years and 
over against diphtheria and tetanus, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and 
CHILD 7 years and over, 2 doses, each of 0.5 ml, separated by an interval of 
2 months, followed by a third dose after 6–12 months. 

Reinforcing immunization of adults and children aged 7 years and over against 
diphtheria and tetanus, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD 7 years 
and over, 1 dose of 0.5 ml, 10 years after completing primary course. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine 
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) causes serious infection such as bacterial pneumonia 
and meningitis, especially in young children. The bacteria are transmitted from person 
to person by droplets from nasopharyngeal secretions. WHO recommends the 
inclusion of Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine in all routine infant 
immunization programmes. The risk of infection decreases in older children and 
therefore Hib vaccine is not generally offered to children over 2 years of age. However, 
older children and adults at an increased risk of Hib infection should be vaccinated, 
including individuals with HIV or immunoglobulin deficiency, stem cell transplant 
recipients, patients with malignant neoplasms receiving chemotherapy, and those with 
asplenia (for example, due to sickle-cell disease or splenectomy).  

For primary immunization, a 3-dose series is generally given at the same time as the 
primary series of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP) vaccine. Combination preparations 
containing Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine with either diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis, 
hepatitis B, or poliomyelitis vaccines are available. 

Injection, capsular polysaccharide of  Haemophilus influenzae type b 
conjugated to a protein carrier 

NOTE. Liquid and freeze-dried preparations are available; excipients may vary between 
individual products and reconstitution may be required before administration (consult 
manufacturer’s information) 

Uses: active immunization against Haemophilus influenzae type b. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 

404 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Dose:  
Primary immunization against Haemophilus influenzae type b, by intramuscular 
injection, INFANT 6 weeks–1 year of age, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, separated 
by 4–8 weeks; ADULT and CHILD over 1 year of age, 1 dose of 0.5 ml. 

BOOSTER DOSE. In some countries a booster dose is given between 12 and 
18 months of age. 

RECONSTITUTION. The vaccine should not be mixed in the vial or syringe with any 
other vaccine unless it is an approved use or manufactured as a combined product; 
consult manufacturer’s literature for further information. 

ADMINISTRATION. The vaccine should be given in the deltoid region in adults and 
older children; anterolateral thigh is the preferred site in infants and young children; if 
given as a separate injection at the same time as other vaccines, it should be 
administered at a different site. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also irritability. 

Hepatitis A vaccine 
Hepatitis A is caused by hepatitis A virus. It is transmitted via the faecal–oral route 
from person to person through close physical contact and ingestion of contaminated 
food and water. Those at increased risk of infection include parenteral drug abusers, 
individuals who change sexual partners frequently, individuals exposed to untreated 
sewage, those living in closed communities, travellers to endemic countries, laboratory 
staff working with the virus, patients with haemophilia treated with plasma-derived 
clotting factors, and individuals who work with primates. Patients with chronic liver 
disease including chronic hepatitis B or chronic hepatitis C are at risk of severe liver 
disease if infected with hepatitis A. 

In highly endemic countries, exposure is almost universal before 10 years of age and 
large-scale immunization programmes should not be undertaken. In areas of 
intermediate endemicity with periodic outbreaks, control of hepatitis A may be 
achieved through widespread vaccination programmes, but is most successful in small, 
self-contained communities. In countries with low endemicity, vaccination for high-risk 
populations may be recommended.  

Several vaccines, which provide long-lasting protection, are available but none are 
licensed for use in children under 1 year of age; the dose of the vaccine and vaccination 
schedule varies between manufacturers. A single dose of vaccine provides a protective 
antibody response within a month; most manufacturers recommend a second dose 6–
18 months later to ensure long-term protection.  

Combined vaccines are available, including inactivated hepatitis A with recombinant 
hepatitis B vaccine.   

Injection, inactivated hepatitis A virus.  

Uses: active immunization against hepatitis A. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 405 



19. Immunologicals 

Dose:  

Immunization against hepatitis A, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD 
over 1 year of age, single dose; a booster dose can be given 6–18 months 
after the initial dose. 

NOTE. Various formulations of hepatitis A vaccines are available, which may contain 
different adsorbents or concentrations of antigen. Consult manufacturer’s literature for 
further information about specific dosages, booster intervals, administration, and use in 
children. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Hepatitis B vaccine 
Hepatitis B is caused by hepatitis B virus. It is transmitted in blood and blood products, 
by sexual contact and by contact, with infectious body fluids. Persons at increased risk 
of infection because of their lifestyle, occupation or other factors, include parenteral 
drug abusers, individuals who change sexual partners frequently, staff and inmates of 
custodial institutions, health-care workers who are at risk of injury from blood-stained 
sharp instruments, dialysis patients, and haemophiliacs. Also at risk are babies born to 
mothers who are HbsAg-positive (hepatitis B virus surface antigen-positive), those 
having medical or dental procedures in countries with high prevalence, and travellers to 
endemic countries.  

WHO recommends hepatitis B vaccine is given as part of the national infant 
immunization programme. Catch-up immunization should be considered for older age 
groups, or high-risk individuals who have not been previously immunized in countries 
with intermediate or low hepatitis B endemicity.  

Two types of hepatitis B vaccines are available; plasma-derived and recombinant 
vaccines. Both types are highly effective but the recombinant vaccine is most 
commonly used. Hepatitis B vaccine is available as a monovalent or a fixed-
combination preparation with other antigens such as Haemophilus influenzae type b, 
poliomyelitis, diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus. The monovalent vaccine should be 
used when immunizing infants at birth. Recommended schedules vary considerably 
between countries, but the minimum recommended interval between doses is 4 weeks. 
In countries where a high proportion of hepatitis B infections are acquired perinatally, a 
3-dose or 4-dose schedule is recommended with the first dose given within 24 hours of 
birth. The other doses are usually given at the same time as the diphtheria-tetanus-
pertussis (DTP) or other vaccines.  

A reduced immunogenicity of the vaccine may occur in individuals with 
immunodeficiency including advanced HIV infection, diabetes, chronic liver disease or 
chronic renal failure.  

Injection, inactivated hepatitis B surface antigen adsorbed onto a mineral 
carrier.  

Uses: active immunization against hepatitis B. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 

406 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Precautions: see introductory notes; also diabetes mellitus; chronic renal 
failure (Appendix 4); and chronic liver disease (Appendix 5) (reduced 
immunogenicity). 

Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against hepatitis B (3-dose schedule), by 
intramuscular injection, CHILD, 1 dose of 0.5 ml given between 6 weeks and 
15 years of age, followed by 2 doses, each of 0.5 ml given at intervals of 
4 weeks; alternatively, 1 dose of 0.5 ml at birth, followed by 2 doses, each of 
0.5 ml, given at 6 and 14 weeks of age.  

Primary immunization of children against hepatitis B (4-dose schedule), by 
intramuscular injection, CHILD, 1 dose of 0.5 ml at birth, followed by 3 doses, 
each of 0.5 ml, at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age. 
NOTE. Immunization with hepatitis B vaccine can be timed to correlate with the 
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis schedule; refer to current WHO advice for hepatitis B 
vaccine.  

Immunization of unimmunized high-risk persons against hepatitis B, by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD over 15 years of age, 3 doses, each 
of 1 ml, with an interval of 1 month between the first and second dose and  
5–11 months between the second and third doses; CHILD under 15 years, 
0.5 ml.  
NOTE. Different products may contain different concentrations of antigen. Consult 
manufacturer’s literature for further information. 

ADMINISTRATION. The vaccine should be given in the deltoid region in adults 
and older children; anterolateral thigh is the preferred site in infants and young 
children; it should not be injected into the buttock (vaccine efficacy is reduced). 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Influenza vaccine 
Influenza viruses type A and B are common causes of respiratory illnesses and are 
transmitted from person to person via droplets or respiratory secretions; their antigenic 
structure is constantly changing. WHO monitors these changes each year and makes 
recommendations for inclusion of strains in the influenza vaccines for the following 
season.  

There are various forms of inactivated influenza vaccine available, and live vaccines are 
licensed for use in some countries. Some vaccines are grown on chick embryos and are 
therefore contraindicated in individuals hypersensitive to eggs. Split virus vaccines and 
subunit vaccines show reduced systemic reactogenicity compared with whole virus 
preparations. 

Annual immunization with inactivated vaccine is recommended in the elderly and 
those of any age with diabetes mellitus, chronic heart disease, chronic liver disease, 
chronic renal disease, chronic respiratory disease including asthma, or 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 407 



19. Immunologicals 

immunosuppression due to disease or drug treatment. Vaccination with inactivated 
vaccine can be considered for contacts of high-risk people, pregnant women, children 
between 6 and 23 months of age, health-care workers or other key workers, on the 
basis of national risk. 

Injection, inactivated influenza virus, types A and B.  

Uses: active immunization against influenza in individuals at risk. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes.  
Precautions: see introductory notes; interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  
Immunization against influenza (annually for high-risk persons), by intramuscular 
injection, ADULT and CHILD over 9 years, 0.5 ml as a single dose; CHILD  
6–35 months, 0.25 ml as a single dose; CHILD 3–9 years, initially 0.5 ml, 
with a second dose of 0.5 ml after at least 4 weeks if not previously infected 
or vaccinated. 

ADMINISTRATION. The trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine should be given into 
the deltoid muscle in adults and children over 1 year and the anterolateral aspect of the 
thigh in infants 6–12 months of age. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also myalgia; very rarely Guillain-Barré 
syndrome has been associated with immunization in older adults. 

Japanese encephalitis vaccine 
Japanese encephalitis is the leading cause of viral encephalitis in Asia. It is transmitted 
to humans by mosquitoes from animal hosts (often pigs and water birds) found mostly 
in rural areas where flooding irrigation is practised. Vaccination against Japanese 
encephalitis should be considered for endemic populations where it presents a public 
health problem; the most effective strategy is an immunization catch-up campaign, 
followed by incorporation of the Japanese encephalitis vaccine into the routine 
immunization programme. Vaccination is also recommended for travellers to endemic 
areas. 

3 types of vaccine are available: the inactivated mouse-brain-derived vaccine based on 
the Nakayama or Beijing strains, the inactivated cell-culture-derived vaccine based on 
the Beijing P-3 strain, and the live attenuated cell-culture-derived SA 14-14-2 vaccine; 
all are suitable for use in children. The recommended immunization schedule varies 
between vaccines and is dependent on local epidemiology. Individual manufacturer’s 
literature should be consulted for specific information.  

Injection, inactivated mouse-brain-derived vaccine, or inactivated cell-
culture-derived vaccine, or live attenuated cell-culture-derived SA 14-14-2 
vaccine. 

NOTE. Formulations, doses, and immunization schedules vary between products and 
manufacturers; consult individual manufacturer’s literature. 

Uses: active immunization against Japanese encephalitis. 

408 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Contraindications: see introductory notes; immunosuppression (live vaccine); 
pregnancy (live vaccine; Appendix 2); interactions: Appendix 1 (see 
Vaccine, live).  

Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Primary immunization against Japanese encephalitis (inactivated vaccine), 
by subcutaneous injection, CHILD 1–3 years, 2 doses given at intervals of 
4 weeks, followed by a booster dose after 1 year. 

Primary immunization against Japanese encephalitis (inactivated vaccine), 
by subcutaneous injection, ADULT and CHILD over 1 year, 1 dose given on days 0, 
7, and 28 (total of 3 doses), followed by a booster dose after 1 year; 
alternatively, 2 doses separated by 1–4 weeks, followed by a booster dose 
after 1 year. 

NOTE. The dose of inactivated vaccine varies between 0.25 ml and 1 ml (doses of 
0.25–0.5 ml are usually administered to children under 3 years of age); refer to 
manufacturer’s literature for further information. Subsequent booster doses at 3-year 
intervals may be recommended for continued protection with the inactivated mouse-
brain-derived vaccine up to the age of 10–15 years. 

Immunization against Japanese encephalitis (live vaccine), by subcutaneous 
injection, ADULT and CHILD over 1 year, 1 dose, followed by a single booster 
dose after 1 year. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also headache, myalgia, 
gastrointestinal disturbances, delayed hypersensitivity reactions (usually 
within 2 weeks of administration); potentially fatal acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis reported with inactivated mouse-brain-derived vaccine. 

Measles vaccine 
Measles is an acute viral infection transmitted by close respiratory contact. 
Immunization against measles is recommended for all infants and young children, and 
also for adolescents and adults who are susceptible or at high risk of exposure. 
Immunization should be considered for individuals with early signs of HIV-induced 
immunosuppression in endemic areas or during outbreaks. Large-scale vaccination to 
control ongoing outbreaks is of limited value, but immunization of high-risk individuals 
within 2 days of exposure with a measles-containing vaccine may improve the clinical 
course of measles. A single dose of measles vaccine is recommended as part of the 
primary immunization programme. A second opportunity for measles immunization 
either through routine or periodic immunization services is also recommended.  

Because of the risk of early and severe measles infection, HIV-infected infants (unless 
severely immunocompromised) should be given the measles vaccine at 6 months of age, 
followed by an additional dose at 9 months of age.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 409 



19. Immunologicals 

The measles vaccine is a live, attenuated vaccine, available either as a single-antigen 
vaccine or combined with either rubella (MR), or mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccines; 
the combined vaccines are usually given as part of the primary immunization schedule. 

No evidence has been found for the alleged associations between measles or MMR 
immunization and serious developmental disorders including autism, or chronic bowel 
disease. 

Powder for injection, live, attenuated measles virus. 

Uses: active immunization against measles. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes; also pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: 
Appendix 1.  

Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against measles, by intramuscular or 
subcutaneous injection, INFANT and CHILD, 1 dose of 0.5 ml at 9 or 12 months 
of age; a reinforcing dose of 0.5 ml can be given after 4 weeks or up to 
6 years of age. 

Immunization of HIV-infected infants against measles (unless severely 
immunocompromised), by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, INFANT, 
1 dose of 0.5 ml at 6 months of age, followed by a second dose of 0.5 ml at 
9 months of age.  

Prophylaxis in susceptible individuals after exposure to measles, by intramuscular 
or subcutaneous injection within 48 hours of contact, ADULT and CHILD over 
9 months, 1 dose of 0.5 ml.  

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also local lymphadenopathy, rash; 
rarely thrombocytopenia purpura. 

Measles, mumps and rubella vaccine (MMR vaccine)  

Injection, live, attenuated measles virus, mumps virus, and rubella virus.  

Uses: active immunization against measles, mumps, and rubella. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also pregnancy (Appendix 2). 
Precautions: see introductory notes; interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against measles, mumps, and rubella, 
by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, CHILD 12–15 months, 1 dose of 
0.5 ml; a reinforcing dose of 0.5 ml can be given 2–5 years after the primary 
dose. 

410 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Prophylaxis in susceptible children after exposure to measles, by intramuscular or 
subcutaneous injection within 72 hours of contact, CHILD 1 year and above, 
1 dose of 0.5 ml. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; adverse reactions are considerably less 
common after second dose; rash, transient arthralgia and arthritis in adult 
females; mild parotitis; rarely aseptic meningitis (with some strains of 
mumps vaccine), orchitis, thrombocytopenic purpura. 

Meningococcal meningitis vaccine 
Neisseria meningitidis causes meningococcal disease including meningitis and septicaemia 
and primarily affects young children. The bacteria are transmitted from person to 
person via respiratory secretions. Immunization against meningococcal disease is 
recommended as part of the routine childhood immunization programme, for outbreak 
situations, for individuals at high-risk including those in military camps and boarding 
schools, travellers to epidemic areas, and for those with a predisposition to 
meningococcal disease (for example, those with asplenia and inherited immune 
deficiencies).   

Meningococcal vaccines are available as combinations of capsular polysaccharide 
antigens (serogroups A and C, or A, C, W135, and Y) or as a polysaccharide of 
serogroup C conjugated to a protein carrier; other variants of the vaccine are available 
in some countries.   

Group C conjugate vaccine is recommended for national childhood immunization 
programmes; for children 2–12 months of age, 3 doses are given at intervals of 4 weeks. 
A single dose of group C conjugate vaccine is sufficient in children over 12 months of 
age. However, individuals with asplenia or splenic dysfunction should be given 2 doses, 
2 months apart; immunized individuals who develop splenic dysfunction should be 
given one additional dose.    

A single dose of either A and C, or A, C, W135, and Y polysaccharide vaccine is 
recommended to control outbreaks and for at-risk individuals including travellers to 
epidemic areas. Groups A and C, and A, C, W135, and Y vaccines elicit a suboptimal 
response in infants under 2 years of age and are not recommended for routine 
immunization; however, they may given in emergency outbreak situations.   

Meningococcal group C conjugate vaccine  

Injection, capsular polysaccharide antigen of Neisseria meningitidis 
serogroup C conjugated to a protein carrier and adsorbed onto a mineral 
carrier.   

NOTE. Both powder for reconstitution and suspension preparations are available.    

Uses: active immunization against meningitis and septicaemia caused by 
N. meningitidis serogroup C.   

Contraindications: see introductory notes. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 411 



19. Immunologicals 

Precautions: see introductory notes.   
Dose:  
Primary immunization against infection by Neisseria meningitidis (serogroup C), 
by intramuscular injection, INFANT 2–12 months of age, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, 
given at intervals of 4 weeks; ADULT and CHILD over 1 year, 0.5 ml as a 
single dose.   

RECONSTITUTION. The vaccine should not be mixed in the vial or syringe with any 
other vaccine unless it is an approved use or manufactured as a combined product.  
Consult manufacturer’s literature for further information. 

ADMINISTRATION. The vaccine should be given in the deltoid region in adults and 
older children; the anterolateral thigh is the preferred site in infants and young children; 
if given as a separate injection at the same time as other vaccines, it should be 
administered at a different site.   

Adverse effects: see introductory notes.   

Meningococcal polysaccharide A and C, or A, C, W135, and Y vaccines    

Powder for injection, inactivated polysaccharide antigens of  Neisseria 
meningitidis serogroups A and C, or serogroups A, C, W135, and Y.    

NOTE. Formulations may vary between products; consult manufacturer’s literature for 
further information regarding individual vaccines.   

Uses: active immunization against meningitis and septicaemia caused by 
N. meningitidis serogroups A and C, or serogroups A, C, W135 and Y.   

Contraindications: see introductory notes.   
Precautions: see introductory notes.   
Dose:  
Immunization against infection by N. meningitidis (serogroups A and C, or A, C, 
W135, and Y), by subcutaneous injection, ADULT and CHILD, 0.5 ml as a single 
dose.   

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Mumps vaccine 
Mumps is a mostly a mild childhood disease, but it can also affect adults, in whom 
complications such as meningitis and orchitis are more common. The mumps virus is 
transmitted from person to person via airborne droplets.  

Mumps vaccine is a live, attenuated vaccine and is available as a single-antigen vaccine 
or in combination with measles and rubella vaccines. For countries seeking to 
immunize against mumps, WHO recommends the use of the combined measles, 

412 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

mumps and rubella vaccine (MMR) as part of the national infant immunization 
programme. 2 doses of mumps vaccine are required for long-term protection; the first 
dose should be given at 12–18 months of age; the second dose at least 4 weeks later, 
but before 6 years of age (usually school entry age). See also Measles vaccine above.  

NOTE. For combined measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, see under Measles, 
mumps and rubella vaccine (MMR) above. 

Powder for injection, live attenuated strain of mumps virus. 

Uses: active immunization against mumps. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also pregnancy (Appendix 2); 
advanced immunodeficiency or immunosuppression. 

Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Immunization of children against mumps, by subcutaneous injection, CHILD, 
1 dose 0.5 ml at 12–18 months of age, followed by a second dose of 0.5 ml 
at least 4 weeks later or up to 6 years of age. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer's 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also parotid swelling; rarely orchitis, 
sensorineural deafness, and aseptic meningitis (higher risk with some 
specific strains). 

Pertussis vaccine 
Pertussis (whooping cough) is a bacterial respiratory infection caused by Bordetella 
pertussis and is transmitted through droplets. Pertussis vaccine is usually administered 
in fixed-dose combinations with diphtheria, tetanus and other vaccines as part of the 
primary immunization programme. WHO recommends 3 doses, given at 6, 10, and 
14 weeks of age. Booster doses are recommended 1–6 years after the primary series in 
countries where the incidence of pertussis has been reduced by immunization. Single 
component pertussis vaccines are available in some countries.  

Whole-cell vaccine composed is frequently associated with minor adverse reactions 
such as local redness and swelling, fever, and agitation. Prolonged crying and seizures 
are less common. Local administration site reactions tend to increase with age and 
number of injections and so whole-cell pertussis vaccine is not recommended for 
adolescents and adults. An acellular form of the vaccine is also available and can be 
used for immunization of older children and adults; it has fewer local and systemic 
effects compared with whole-cell pertussis vaccine (see under Diphtheria).  

NOTE. For combined Diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus vaccine, see under 
Diphtheria vaccine above.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 413 



19. Immunologicals 

Pneumococcal vaccine 
Streptococcus pneumoniae causes serious infections such as pneumonia and meningitis, 
especially in young children under 2 years of age, the elderly, and individuals with 
immunodeficiency. The bacteria are transmitted via respiratory secretions. WHO 
recommends that pneumococcal conjugate vaccine should be included in national 
routine childhood immunization programmes. The 7-valent conjugate vaccine (PCV-7) 
provides effective protection in young children; the primary schedule usually consists of 
3 doses, administered at intervals of at least 4 weeks; other 3-dose schedules have been 
shown to be effective and are in use in some countries. A booster dose given after 
12 months of age may improve the immune response. Immunization should be initiated 
before 6 months of age and may start as early as 6 weeks of age. The vaccine can be 
given to HIV-infected individuals.  

A single dose of PCV-7 can be given to children aged 12–24 months who have not 
been previously vaccinated and to children aged 2–5 years at high risk of pneumococcal 
disease.  

A 23-valent (unconjugated) polysaccharide vaccine is also available for adults and 
children over 2 years of age at risk of pneumococcal infection. It provides a suboptimal 
response in infants, and therefore is not recommended for use in this age group. 

Injection, capsular polysaccharides of Streptococcus pneumoniae conjugated 
to a protein carrier, adsorbed onto a mineral carrier 

NOTE. A 7-valent conjugate vaccine is currently available; other multivalent conjugate 
vaccines are under development 

Uses: active immunization against Streptococcus pneumoniae. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Primary immunization against infection by Streptococcus pneumoniae (7-valent 
conjugate vaccine), by intramuscular injection, INFANT, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, 
at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age; alternatively 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, at 2, 4, 
and 6 months of age; a reinforcing dose of 0.5 ml can be given at 12–15 
months of age; CHILD 1–5 years, 0.5 ml as a single dose. 

ADMINISTRATION. The vaccine should be given in the deltoid region in young 
children; the anterolateral thigh is the preferred site in infants. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Poliomyelitis vaccine 
Poliomyelitis is an acute viral infection, which causes paralysis of varying degrees. It is 
transmitted from person to person via the oral–oral or faecal–oral route. Poliomyelitis 
vaccine should be included in national routine childhood immunization programmes. 

414 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Two types of vaccines are available. Oral poliomyelitis vaccine (OPV) contains 
3 types of live, attenuated poliomyelitis viruses; monovalent live oral vaccines are also 
available. Injectable inactivated poliomyelitis vaccine (IPV) contains 3 types of 
inactivated strains.  

For primary immunization using OPV, a 3-dose schedule is used. Vaccination may need 
to be repeated in patients with diarrhoea or vomiting. HIV-infected individuals can 
receive the live oral vaccine, but it must not be used for those with primary 
immunodeficiency, those who are immunosuppressed, or their close contacts. The need 
for strict personal hygiene must be stressed as the vaccine virus is excreted in the faeces; 
the contacts of a recently vaccinated baby should be advised of the need for thorough 
hand-washing after changing the baby’s nappies. Reinforcing doses can be given after 
primary immunization.  

Inactivated poliomyelitis vaccine is used in some countries for routine immunization; 
routine schedules vary widely, but in industrialized countries, usually include 2–3 doses 
in the first year of life and at least one booster dose 6–12 months after the last dose of 
the primary series. Sequential schedules using IPV followed by OPV are also used in 
some countries to decrease the risk of vaccine-associated poliomyelitis, which occurs 
only rarely with OPV; usually 1–3 doses of IPV are followed by 2–3 doses of OPV. 
The inactivated vaccine is available as a monovalent vaccine or in fixed combinations 
with other antigens.  

Countries considering a change from OPV to IPV use should conduct a thorough 
evaluation of the epidemiological, financial and operational implications before 
finalizing a change in policy. 

Poliomyelitis vaccine (OPV) (live, attenuated)  

Oral suspension, live, attenuated poliomyelitis virus, types 1, 2, and 3. 
NOTE. Monovalent vaccines are available for use in some countries.  

Uses: active immunization against poliomyelitis. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also primary immunodeficiency or 
immunosuppression. 

Precautions: see introductory notes; also pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against poliomyelitis, by mouth, CHILD, 
3 drops at birth and at 6, 10, and at 14 weeks of age. Reinforcing 
immunization of children against poliomyelitis, by mouth, CHILD, 3 drops at 
least 3 years after completion of primary course and a further 3 drops at 
15–19 years of age. 

Primary immunization of unimmunized adult against poliomyelitis, by mouth, 
ADULT, 3 doses, each of 3 drops, with an interval of at least 4 weeks 
between each dose. Reinforcing immunization of adults against 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 415 



19. Immunologicals 

poliomyelitis, by mouth, ADULT, 3 drops, 10 years after completion of 
primary course. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; rarely, vaccine-associated poliomyelitis 
in recipients of vaccine and contacts of recipients. 

Poliomyelitis vaccine (IPV) (inactivated)  

Injection, inactivated poliomyelitis virus, types 1, 2, and 3.  

Uses: active immunization against poliomyelitis. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 
Dose:  
Primary immunization of children against poliomyelitis, by intramuscular injection, 

CHILD, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, separated by at least 4 weeks (either at 6, 10, 
and 14 weeks of age or at 2, 4, and 6 months of age), followed by another 
dose of 0.5 ml after 6–12 months; further reinforcing doses are given in 
some countries (for example, at 4–6 years; consult national 
recommendations). 

Primary immunization of unimmunized adults against poliomyelitis, 
by intramuscular injection, ADULT, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, separated by at least 
4 weeks; reinforcing doses can be given (consult national recommendations). 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Rabies vaccine 
Rabies is a virus transmitted to humans by rabid animals via a bite or a scratch. It is 
invariably fatal once signs of disease occur. WHO recommends pre-exposure 
immunization of individuals at increased risk of contracting rabies, including those at 
risk due to occupational exposure (such as laboratory workers, veterinary surgeons, 
animal handlers and health workers), and people living or travelling to enzootic areas 
(in such areas, children aged 5–15 years are at particular risk of exposure). Cell-derived 
rabies vaccines are used for both pre-exposure and post-exposure protection. 
Vaccines of nerve cell tissue origin should not be used because they are less potent and 
are frequently associated with adverse events.  

Rabies vaccine is used as part of post-exposure treatment to prevent rabies in patients who 
have been bitten by rabid animals or animals suspected of being rabid. The bite wound 
or scratch should be thoroughly cleansed. Treatment is dependent upon the individual’s 
immune status and upon the level of risk of rabies in the country concerned (consult 
national immunization schedule). In certain circumstances, for example, patients with 
incomplete prophylaxis or unimmunized individuals, passive immunization with rabies 
immunoglobulin can be given (see Rabies immunoglobulin, section 19.2). Post-
exposure treatment with rabies vaccine and rabies immunoglobulin is necessary for 

416 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

individuals who are immunocompromised, HIV-positive, taking malaria 
chemoprophylaxis, or under anaesthesia; antibody response should be monitored. 

Rabies vaccine (inactivated) 

Injection, inactivated rabies virus prepared in cell culture. 

Uses: active immunization against rabies; pre-exposure prophylaxis, post-
exposure treatment. 

Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 
RABIES IMMUNOGLOBULIN. If schedule requires rabies vaccine and rabies 
immunoglobulin to be administered at the same time, they should be administered 
using separate syringes and separate sites. 
Dose:  
NOTE. Doses may vary between products (consult manufacturer’s literature for further 
information). 

Pre-exposure prophylaxis against rabies, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and 
CHILD, 3 doses, on days 0, 7, and 28 (day 28 preferable, but administration 
may be advanced towards day 21 if time is limited); alternatively, by 
intradermal injection, 3 doses, each of 0.1 ml, on days 0, 7, and 28 
(administration may be advanced towards day 21 if time is limited). 
BOOSTER DOSES. Periodic booster doses are recommended only for individuals 
whose occupation puts them at continuous or frequent risk of rabies exposure. In 
such cases, a booster dose should be given at intervals dictated by regular testing for 
rabies antibodies (a concentration of virus neutralizing antibodies of at least 
0.5 IU/ml indicates protection). Where serological testing is unavailable, booster 
vaccination every 5 years may be an acceptable alternative. 

Post-exposure treatment against rabies in unimmunized individuals, by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD, 1 dose given on days 0, 3, 7, 14, and 
28 (total of 5 doses); alternatively, 2 doses on day 0 (one in each deltoid or 
thigh), followed by 1 dose on days 7 and 21 (total of 4 doses). 

Post-exposure treatment against rabies in unimmunized individuals, by 
intradermal injection, ADULT and CHILD (8-site regimen), 1 dose of 0.1 ml 
administered at 8 separate sites on day 0 (one in each upper arm, one in 
each lateral thigh, one on each side of the suprascapular region, and one on 
each side of the lower quadrant region of the abdomen), followed by 
1 doses of 0.1 ml in each upper arm and each lateral thigh on day 7, and 
1 dose of 0.1 ml in one upper arm on days 30 and 90; alternatively (2-site 
regimen), 1 dose of 0.1 ml at 2 sites on days 0, 3, 7, and 28 (total of 8 doses). 

Post-exposure treatment against rabies in fully immunized individuals, by 
intramuscular or intradermal injection, ADULT and CHILD, 2 doses, separated by 
3 days. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 417 



19. Immunologicals 

ADMINISTRATION: When administered by intramuscular injection, the vaccine 
should be given in the deltoid region in adults and children; the anterolateral thigh is 
the preferred site in children less than 2 years of age. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also mild gastrointestinal disturbances, 
headache, dizziness. 

Rotavirus vaccine 
Rotaviruses are the most common cause of severe diarrhoea in infants and young 
children. The virus is transmitted via the faecal–oral route from person to person in 
close contact or via contaminated fomites. WHO recommends the inclusion of 
rotavirus vaccination into national immunization programmes in regions where efficacy 
data suggest a significant public health impact; the clinical efficacy of rotavirus vaccines 
has so far been demonstrated in the United States of America, Europe, and Latin 
America. 

There are two live oral attenuated rotavirus vaccines currently available (the 
monovalent and the pentavalent); both are effective against severe rotavirus infection. 
Rotavirus vaccine is administered orally in a 2- or 3-dose schedule, starting at between 6 
and 12 weeks of age, with an interval of at least 4 weeks between doses. The 2-dose 
schedule should be completed before 24 weeks of age (preferably before 16 weeks). 
The 3-dose schedule is usually given at ages 2, 4, and 6 months; all 3 doses should be 
completed before 32 weeks of age. Subsequent booster doses after the primary 
schedule are not recommended.  

The rotavirus vaccine virus is excreted in the faeces and may be transmitted to close 
contacts; the vaccine should be used with caution in those in close contact with 
immunosuppressed individuals. 

Oral suspension, live, attenuated rotavirus  
NOTE. Both monovalent and pentavalent vaccines are available, each with different 
formulations; the dose and schedule varies between products and reconstitution may be 
necessary before administration (consult individual manufacturer’s literature for further 
information). 

Uses: active immunization against rotavirus infection. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also immunodeficiency; history or 
predisposition to intussusception. 

Precautions: see introductory notes; postpone administration in infants with 
acute gastroenteritis or serious febrile illness. 

Dose:  
Immunization of infants against rotavirus infection, by mouth, INFANT  
6–12 weeks of age, 2–3 doses separated by at least 4 weeks. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also mild and transient gastrointestinal 
symptoms. 

418 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Rubella vaccine 
Rubella is normally a mild childhood disease, which is transmitted from person to 
person via the respiratory route. The primary purpose of rubella vaccination is to 
prevent rubella infection during pregnancy, which can lead to fetal death and congenital 
rubella syndrome (characterized by multiple birth defects including mental retardation, 
and hearing and visual impairment). WHO recommends either universal immunization 
of infants and children through the national immunization programme to eliminate 
rubella and congenital rubella syndrome, or prevention of congenital rubella syndrome 
through immunization of women of child-bearing age. Countries seeking to eliminate 
rubella should ensure that all women of child-bearing age and over 80% of children are 
immunized.  

Rubella vaccine should be given to women of child-bearing age if they are 
seronegative to protect them from the risks of rubella in pregnancy. Rubella vaccine 
should not be given in pregnancy and patients should be advised not to become 
pregnant within one month of vaccination. However, congenital rubella syndrome has 
not been reported following inadvertent immunization shortly before or during 
pregnancy. There is no evidence that the vaccine is teratogenic and termination of 
pregnancy following inadvertent immunization should not be recommended. There is 
no risk to a pregnant woman from contact with recently vaccinated persons as the 
vaccine virus is not transmitted.  

There are a number of rubella vaccines available, either as single antigen vaccines or 
combined with measles and mumps vaccines (MMR), or the measles vaccine (MR). In 
most countries, the vaccine is given as MMR or MR as part of the childhood 
immunization programme. Most vaccines are based on the live, attenuated RA 27/3 
strain of the rubella virus.  

NOTE. For combined measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, see under Measles 
vaccine above. 

Powder for injection), live attenuated rubella virus.  

Uses: active immunization against rubella. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also untreated active tuberculosis; 
pregnancy (see also introductory notes; Appendix 2).  

Precautions: see introductory notes; interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  

Immunization against rubella, by subcutaneous injection, ADULT and CHILD, 0.5 ml 
as a single dose. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to the manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also rash, lymphadenopathy, 
paraesthesia; transient arthralgia and arthritis in unimmunized adolescent 
and adult females; rarely thrombocytopenia. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 419 



19. Immunologicals 

Tetanus vaccine 
Tetanus is caused by the action of a neurotoxin of Clostridium tetani in necrosed tissues 
such as occur in dirty wounds. Tetanus vaccines are based on tetanus toxoid, which is 
adsorbed on aluminium or calcium salts to increase immunogenicity. Tetanus toxoid is 
available both as single antigen and in vaccine combinations. 

WHO recommends a childhood tetanus immunization schedule of 5 doses; the primary 
series of 3 doses should be given during the first year of life, as the combined 
diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus vaccine (DPT). The 4th booster dose with a tetanus 
toxoid-containing vaccine should be given at 4–7 years and the fifth dose during 
adolescence at 12–15 years. A sixth dose can be given in early adulthood for life-long 
protection (see also under Diphteria). When tetanus prophylaxis is needed following 
injury, combined diphtheria and tetanus preparations should be used rather than 
tetanus alone to promote immunity against diphtheria (see below).  

Neonatal tetanus due to infection of the baby’s umbilical stump during unclean delivery 
is the cause of many deaths of newborn infants. Control of neonatal tetanus may be 
achieved by ensuring adequate hygiene during delivery and by ensuring protective 
immunity of mothers in late pregnancy. Alternatively, women of child-bearing age may 
be immunized against tetanus with a single-antigen vaccine.  

Wounds are considered to be tetanus-prone if they are sustained either more than 
6 hours before surgical treatment of the wound or at any interval after injury and show 
one or more of the following: a puncture-type wound, a compound fracture, a wound 
containing foreign bodies, a significant degree of devitalized tissue, clinical evidence of 
sepsis, contamination with soil/manure likely to contain tetanus organisms. All wounds 
should receive thorough cleansing.   

For clean wounds, fully immunized individuals (those who have received a total of 
5 doses of tetanus vaccine at appropriate intervals) and those whose primary 
immunization is complete (with boosters up to date) do not require tetanus vaccine; 
individuals whose primary immunization is incomplete or whose boosters are not up to 
date require a reinforcing dose of tetanus vaccine (followed by further doses as required 
to complete the schedule); non-immunized individuals (or those whose immunization 
status is not known or who have been immunized but are now immunocompromised) 
should be given a dose of the vaccine immediately (followed by completion of the full 
course of the vaccine if records confirm the need).  

For tetanus-prone wounds, management is as for clean wounds with the addition of a dose 
of antitetanus immunoglobulin (section 19.2) given at a different site; in fully 
immunized individuals and those whose primary immunization is complete (see above) 
the immunoglobulin is needed only if the risk of infection is especially high (for 
example, contamination with manure). Antibacterial prophylaxis (with benzylpenicillin, 
or amoxicillin with clavulanic acid, or metronidazole) may also be required for tetanus-
prone wounds (see section 6.2).  

NOTE. For combined Diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus vaccine, and combined 
Diphtheria and tetanus vaccines, see under Diphtheria vaccine.  

Injection, tetanus toxoid adsorbed onto a mineral carrier. 

420 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Uses: active immunization against tetanus and neonatal tetanus; tetanus 
prophylaxis as part of wound management (tetanus-prone wounds and 
clean wounds). 

Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes. 
ANTITETANUS IMMUNOGLOBULIN. If schedule requires tetanus vaccine and 
antitetanus immunoglobulin to be administered at the same time, they should be 
administered using separate syringes and separate sites. 
Dose:    
NOTE. Some countries recommend a maximum of 5 doses of tetanus vaccine in a 
lifetime. 

Primary immunization of unimmunized adolescents and adults (including 
women of child-bearing age) against tetanus, by intramuscular injection, ADULT 
and ADOLESCENT, 3 doses, each of 0.5 ml, with an interval of not less than 
4 weeks between the first and second doses and 6 months between the 
second and third doses; followed by 2 reinforcing doses, each of 0.5 ml, the 
first at least 1 year after completion of the primary course and the second 
dose at least 1 year later. 

Reinforcing immunization of adults against tetanus, by intramuscular injection, 
ADULT, 2 doses, each of 0.5 ml, the first 10 years after completion of the 
primary course, and the second dose 10 years later. 

Immunization of unimmunized pregnant women against tetanus, by 
intramuscular injection, ADULT, 2 doses, each of 0.5 ml, with an interval of at 
least 4 weeks between each dose (second dose at least 2 weeks before 
delivery), followed by a third dose of 0.5 ml 6 months later; and 2 booster 
doses, each of 0.5 ml, the first at least 1 year after completion of the 
primary course and the second dose at least 1 year later. 

Management of tetanus-prone wounds and clean wounds, by intramuscular 
injection, ADULT, 0.5 ml as a single dose (the dose schedule will be dependent 
upon the immune status of the patient and the level of contamination of the 
wound; see introductory notes). 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes. 

Typhoid vaccine 
Typhoid fever is caused by Salmonella typhi. It is transmitted via the faecal–oral route and 
associated with poor hygiene and sanitation. Immunization against typhoid fever is 
recommended for children of school-age and adults in endemic areas, travellers to 
endemic areas, and laboratory workers handling specimens from suspected cases. The 
vaccines do not provide complete protection and should not replace hygiene 
precautions.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 421 



19. Immunologicals 

A single dose of parenteral Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine is recommended for 
adults and children over 2 years of age, followed by booster doses every 3 years in cases 
of continued exposure.  

A live oral typhoid vaccine containing an attenuated strain of Salmonella typhi (Ty21a) is 
available either as enteric coated capsules, or as a liquid suspension. The capsules are 
licensed for individuals over 5 years of age and are given as 4 doses, each 2 days apart; 
the suspension can be administered to children over 2 years of age and is given as 
3 doses, each 2 days apart. Protection is achieved 7 days after the last dose. In endemic 
areas, a booster dose of the live oral vaccine is recommended every 3 years; for 
travellers to endemic areas from non-endemic areas an annual booster is recommended. 
Oral typhoid vaccine is contraindicated in immunosuppressed individuals and in acute 
gastrointestinal illness (asymptomatic HIV-positive individuals can be given the vaccine 
if CD4 cell counts are over 200 mm3).  

Inactivated whole-cell typhoid vaccines may still be available in some countries; 
children over 5 years of age are given 2 doses separated by an interval of 4 weeks, with 
a booster dose every 3 years. However, inactivated whole-cell vaccines are associated 
with frequent adverse effects and WHO recommends that these vaccines should be 
replaced with either the Vi-based polysaccharide vaccine or live oral vaccines. 

Capsule, live attenuated strain of Salmonella typhi (Ty21a)  
Oral suspension, live attenuated strain of Salmonella typhi (Ty21a)  
Injection, Vi capsular polysaccharide typhoid: 25 microgram/0.5 ml  

NOTE. Reconstitution of the oral suspension may be necessary before administration 
(consult individual manufacturer’s literature for further information). 

Uses: active immunization against typhoid. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes. 
Precautions: see introductory notes; interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  
Immunization against typhoid fever, by mouth, capsules, ADULT and CHILD over 
5 years, one dose given on days 1, 3, 5, and 7 (total of 4 doses); suspension, 
ADULT and CHILD over 2 years, one dose given on days 1, 3, and 5 (total of 
3 doses); reinforcing doses can be given every year for travellers to disease-
endemic countries and every 3 years for those living in disease-endemic 
areas. 

ADMINISTRATION WITH ANTIBACTERIALS AND ANTIMALARIALS.  
Administration of oral typhoid vaccine should be coordinated so that the antimalarial, 
mefloquine, is not taken for at least 12 hours before or after a dose; vaccination should 
be completed at least 3 days before the first dose of mefloquine or other antimalarials 
(except proguanil hydrochloride in combination with atovaquone, which may be given 
concomitantly). Oral typhoid vaccine is inactivated by concomitant administration of 
antibacterials; if possible antibacterials should be avoided 3 days before, or 3 days after, 
vaccination. 

422 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



19. Immunologicals 

Immunization against typhoid fever (Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine), by 
subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD 2 years and over, 
1 dose of 0.5 ml, with reinforcing doses every 3 years for those at continued 
risk. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes.  

Varicella vaccine 
Varicella-zoster (chickenpox) is a highly contagious disease caused by varicella-zoster 
virus. Transmission is via droplets, aerosol or direct person-to-person contact. Various 
formulations of the live, attenuated vaccine based on the Okastrain are available. 
Varicella-zoster vaccine may be used as part of a national childhood immunization 
programme. The vaccine may also be used in adolescents or adults without a history of 
varicella but who are at increased risk of infection.  

A single dose of vaccine is effective in children aged 1–12 years; (however, the optimal 
age for immunization is 12–24 months). In adults and adolescents over 13 years of age, 
2 doses, each separated by 4–8 weeks, can be given. In some countries, 1 dose is 
considered sufficient regardless of age. Post-exposure vaccination can be considered for 
seronegative health-care workers who come into direct contact with patients with 
varicella-zoster.  

Rarely, the varicella-zoster vaccine virus has been transmitted from vaccinated 
individuals to close contacts; if a vaccine-related rash develops within 4–6 weeks, 
contact with varicella-susceptible pregnant women and individuals at high risk of severe 
varicella infection, including patients with immunodeficiency or receiving 
immunosuppressive therapy, should be avoided.  

Injection, live, attenuated varicella-zoster virus.  

Uses: active immunization against varicella-zoster. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also pregnancy (avoid pregnancy for 
3 months after vaccination; Appendix 2); immunodeficiency; patients 
receiving immunosuppressive therapy; untreated active tuberculosis. 

Precautions: see introductory notes; also family history of congenital immune 
disorders.  

Dose:  
Immunization against varicella-zoster infection, by subcutaneous injection, ADULT 
and ADOLESCENT over 13 years of age, 2 doses, each of 0.5 ml, separated by  
4–8 weeks; CHILD 1–12 years of age, 0.5 ml as a single dose. 

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also mild varicella-like rash within  
4–6 weeks. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 423 



19. Immunologicals 

Yellow fever vaccine 
Yellow fever is a viral haemorrhagic fever which is endemic in tropical regions of Africa 
and South America. The disease is transmitted by Haemagogus and Aedes mosquito bites. 
Yellow fever 17D vaccine is a live, attenuated vaccine, which offers protection from 10 
days after vaccination, for at least 10 years. 

WHO recommends that all countries with endemic yellow fever should incorporate 
yellow fever vaccine into their national immunization programme; the vaccine should 
be given to infants at 9–12 months of age and can be given at the same time as the 
measles vaccine. Yellow fever vaccine is also recommended for people at high risk of 
yellow fever exposure, including forestry and agricultural workers, and people living in 
or travelling to endemic areas. During epidemics, mass vaccination campaigns should 
be initiated as early as possible.  

Immunization is not recommended for infants aged 6–8 months or during pregnancy, 
except during an epidemic when the risk of transmission may be very high. Yellow 
fever vaccine is contraindicated in individuals with severe immunodeficiency or severe 
egg allergy (HIV-infected individuals may be vaccinated if CD4 cell counts are over 
200 per mm3).  

Powder for injection, live, attenuated yellow fever virus.  

Uses: active immunization against yellow fever. 
Contraindications: see introductory notes; also not recommended for infants 
under 9 months of age. 

Precautions: see introductory notes; also pregnancy (Appendix 2); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose: 
Immunization of children against yellow fever, by deep subcutaneous or 
intramuscular injection, INFANT at 9–12 months, 0.5 ml as a single dose.  

Immunization of travellers and other at-risk individuals against yellow fever, by 
deep subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, ADULT and CHILD over 9 months, 
0.5 ml as a single dose. 

NOTE. Subcutaneous route is preferred.  

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions. 

Adverse effects: see introductory notes; also headache, myalgia, weakness; very 
rarely encephalitis (infants more susceptible); viscerotropic disease, multiple 
organ failure (the elderly more susceptible). 

424 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

 

 

 

SECTION 20:  
Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase 
inhibitors 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 425 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

Muscle relaxants 
Muscle relaxants used in surgery are classified according to their mode of 
action as either depolarizing or non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
drugs. Their use allows abdominal surgery to be carried out under light 
anaesthesia. They should never be given until it is certain that general 
anaesthesia has been established and ventilation must be mechanically assisted 
until they have been completely inactivated.    
Suxamethonium is the only widely used depolarizing muscle relaxant. It 
produces rapid, complete paralysis, which is very short lasting in most patients 
and is of particular value for laryngoscopy and intubation. Should paralysis be 
prolonged, ventilation must be assisted until muscle function is fully restored. 
Suxamethonium normally produces a phase I (depolarizing) neuromuscular 
block. After high doses or prolonged use, the nature of the block changes to a 
phase II (non-depolarizing) block; this phase II block (also known as a dual 
block) is associated with prolonged neuromuscular blockade and apnoea.    
Alcuronium is a non-depolarizing muscle relaxant with a duration of action of 
about 30 minutes. Its effects may be rapidly reversed after surgery by the 
anticholinesterase, neostigmine (see below), provided atropine (section 1.3) is 
given to prevent excessive autonomic activity. Vecuronium, another widely 
used non-depolarizing muscle relaxant, has a shorter duration of action (20–
30 minutes); it causes minimal adverse cardiovascular effects.    

Cholinesterase inhibitors 

Reversal of block 

Cholinesterase inhibitors, such as neostigmine, are used at the end of an 
operation to reverse the muscle paralysis produced by non-depolarizing 
blocking drugs, such as alcuronium and vecuronium. Neostigmine must not be 
used with depolarizing blocking drugs, such as suxamethonium, since 
neostigmine will prolong the muscle paralysis. Neostigmine is also used to treat 
postoperative non-obstructive urinary retention.   

Myasthenia gravis  

Cholinesterase inhibitors, such as neostigmine and pyridostigmine, are used in 
the symptomatic treatment of myasthenia gravis. They act by inhibiting 
acetylcholinesterase, thereby prolonging the action of acetylcholine, and thus 
enhancing neuromuscular transmission; this produces at least a partial 
improvement in most myasthenic patients but complete restoration of muscle 
strength is rare. Unless the patient has difficulty in swallowing, cholinesterase 
inhibitors are given by mouth. Pyridostigmine has a slower onset (usually 

426 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

within 30–60 minutes), but a longer duration of effect than neostigmine; it also 
tends to cause fewer muscarinic effects such as diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, 
and excess salivation, and so is usually preferred. Doses should be carefully 
adjusted to avoid precipitating a cholinergic crisis due to overdosage; this must 
be differentiated from a myasthenic crisis because of disease progression, and 
consequent underdosage; the principal effect in both cases is increased muscle 
weakness.   
In myasthenic crisis, if the patient has difficulty in breathing and in swallowing, 
the cholinesterase inhibitor must be given by intramuscular or subcutaneous 
injection; neostigmine is usually preferred over pyridostigmine in such cases. 
To reduce the muscarinic effects of neostigmine, atropine (section 1.3) should 
also be given.  
A corticosteroid, such as prednisolone (section 18.1), is also used for the 
treatment of myasthenia gravis; addition of the immunosuppressant, 
azathioprine (section 8.1) may allow a dose reduction of both the 
corticosteroid and of the anticholinesterase.  

Alcuronium 
Injection: 5 mg (chloride)/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 

Alcuronium is a representative non-depolarizing muscle relaxant. Various medicines 
can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: muscle relaxation during surgery. 
Contraindications: respiratory insufficiency or pulmonary disease; dehydrated 
or severely ill patients; myasthenia gravis or other neuromuscular disorders. 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
burns patients (possibly increase dose); electrolyte disturbances; respiratory 
acidosis or hypokalaemia (possibly decrease dose); history of asthma; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose: Muscle relaxation, by intravenous injection, ADULT, initially 200–
250 micrograms/kg, then 30–50 micrograms/kg as required for 
maintenance; CHILD, initially 125–200 micrograms/kg, then 
50 micrograms/kg for maintenance. 

Adverse effects: histamine release, leading to allergic reactions, such as wheal 
and flare effects at site of injection, flushing, and bronchospasm 
(anaphylactoid reactions reported); transient hypotension, slight increase in 
heart rate or decreased pulse rate. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 427 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

Neostigmine 
Injection: 500 micrograms in 1-ml ampoule; 2.5 mg (metilsulfate) in 1-ml 
ampoule. 
Tablet: 15 mg (bromide). 

Uses: myasthenia gravis; reversal of non-depolarizing muscle relaxants 
administered during surgery, postoperative non-obstructive urinary 
retention. 

Contraindications: recent intestinal or bladder surgery; mechanical intestinal or 
urinary tract obstruction; after suxamethonium; pneumonia; peritonitis. 

Precautions: asthma; urinary tract infections; cardiovascular disease including 
arrhythmias (especially bradycardia, vagotonia, recent myocardial infarction 
or atrioventricular block); hyperthyroidism; hypotension; peptic ulcer; 
epilepsy; parkinsonism; renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Myasthenia gravis, by mouth as neostigmine bromide, ADULT, initially 15–30 mg 
at suitable intervals throughout the day (usual duration of action 2–4 hours), 
gradually increased until desired response is obtained; usual total daily dose 
within range, 75–300 mg, given at appropriate intervals when high doses are 
required (doses above 180 mg daily are not usually well tolerated); NEONATE, 
initially 1–2 mg every 4 hours, 30 minutes before feeds; CHILD up to 6 years, 
initially 7.5 mg; CHILD 6–12 years, initially 15 mg; usual total daily dose,  
15–90 mg given in divided doses at appropriate intervals. 

Myasthenia gravis, by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, ADULT, 1–2.5 mg as 
required; usual total daily dose,, 5–20 mg; NEONATE, 50–250 micrograms 
every 4 hours, 30 minutes before feeds (not usually required beyond 
8 weeks of age); CHILD, 200–500 micrograms as required. 

Reversal of non-depolarizing block, by intravenous injection over 1 minute, 
ADULT, 2.5 mg, followed if necessary by supplements of 500 micrograms to 
maximum total dose of 5 mg; CHILD, 40 micrograms/kg (titrated using 
peripheral nerve stimulator). 

NOTE. To reduce muscarinic effects atropine sulfate by intravenous injection 
(ADULT, 0.6–1.2 mg, CHILD, 20 micrograms/kg) with or before neostigmine 

Postoperative urinary retention, by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 
ADULT, 500 micrograms (catheterization required if urine not passed within 
1 hour). 

Adverse effects: increased salivation, nausea and vomiting, abdominal cramps, 
diarrhoea; signs of overdosage include bronchoconstriction, increased 
bronchial secretions, lacrimation, excessive sweating, involuntary defecation 

428 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

and micturition, miosis, nystagmus, bradycardia, heart block, arrhythmias, 
hypotension, agitation, excessive dreaming, and weakness eventually leading 
to fasciculation and paralysis; thrombophlebitis reported; rash associated 
tablet (bromide salt) formulations. 

Pyridostigmine 
Injection: 1 mg in 1-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 60 mg (bromide). 

Pyridostigmine bromide is a complementary list cholinesterase inhibitor. 

Uses: myasthenia gravis. 
Contraindications: recent intestinal or bladder surgery; mechanical intestinal or 
urinary tract obstruction; after suxamethonium; pneumonia; peritonitis. 

Precautions: asthma; urinary tract infection; cardiovascular disease including 
arrhythmias (especially bradycardia or atrioventricular block); 
hyperthyroidism; hypotension; peptic ulcer; epilepsy; parkinsonism; avoid 
intravenous injection; renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Myasthenia gravis, by mouth, ADULT, initially 30–120 mg at suitable intervals 
throughout the day, gradually increased until desired response is obtained; 
usual total daily dose within range, 0.3–1.2 g, given at appropriate intervals 
when high doses are required (doses above 450 mg daily are not usually 
advisable in order to avoid acetylcholine receptor down regulation); CHILD 
up to 6 years, initially 30 mg; CHILD 6–12 years, initially 60 mg; usual total 
daily dose, 30–360 mg given in divided doses at appropriate intervals. 

Myasthenia gravis, by intramuscular injection, ADULT, 2 mg every 2–3 hours; 
NEONATE, 50–150 micrograms daily, before feeds (but neostigmine usually 
preferred); CHILD, 1–12 mg daily, given in divided doses at appropriate 
intervals. 

Adverse effects: muscarinic effects generally weaker than those associated with 
neostigmine; and include increased salivation, nausea and vomiting, 
abdominal cramps, and diarrhoea; signs of overdosage include 
bronchoconstriction, increased bronchial secretions, lacrimation, excessive 
sweating, involuntary defecation and micturition, miosis, nystagmus, 
bradycardia, heart block, arrhythmias, hypotension, agitation, excessive 
dreaming, and weakness eventually leading to fasciculation and paralysis; 
thrombophlebitis; rash associated with tablet (bromide salt) formulations. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 429 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

Suxamethonium 
Injection: 50 mg (chloride)/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Powder for injection (chloride) in vial. 

NOTE. Powder formulation is usually preferred; liquid requires refrigerated storage. 

Uses: brief muscular paralysis during endotracheal intubation, endoscopy and 
electroconvulsive therapy. 

Contraindications: inability to maintain clear airway; personal or family history 
of malignant hyperthermia; neurological disease involving acute wasting of 
major muscle, prolonged immobilization (risk of hyperkalaemia); personal 
or family history of congenital myotonic disease; Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy; myasthenia gravis; glaucoma, ocular surgery; liver disease; burns; 
low plasma cholinesterase activity (including severe liver disease); 
hyperkalaemia. 

Precautions: digitalis toxicity or recent digitalization; cardiac, respiratory or 
neuromuscular disease; paraplegia, spinal cord injury, or severe trauma; 
severe sepsis (risk of hyperkalaemia); prolonged apnoea on repeated 
injection (infusion preferred for long surgical procedures); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); children; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Muscle relaxation, by intramuscular injection, INFANT, up to 4–5 mg/kg; CHILD, 
up to 4 mg/kg; maximum, 150 mg. 

Muscle relaxation, by intravenous injection, ADULT and CHILD, 1 mg/kg, followed 
if necessary by supplements of 0.5–1 mg/kg at 5–10 minute intervals; 
INFANT, 2 mg/kg. 

Muscle relaxation (prolonged procedures), by intravenous infusion, ADULT,  
2.5–4 mg/minute of solution containing 1–2 mg/ml; maximum, 
500 mg/hour; CHILD, reduce infusion rate according to body weight. 

Adverse effects: postoperative muscle pain, particularly in patients ambulant 
after operation in females; myoglobinuria; myoglobinaemia; prolonged 
apnoea; increased intraocular pressure; hyperkalaemia; bradycardia, 
hypotension, and arrhythmias, particularly with halothane (but, with 
repeated doses, tachycardia, and hypertension); increased salivary, bronchial 
and gastric secretions; transient rise in intragastric pressure; hypersensitivity 
reactions including flushing, rash, urticaria, bronchospasm, and shock 
(more common in women, in history of allergy, or in asthmatics); rarely 
malignant hyperthermia (but often fatal). 

 

430 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



20. Muscle relaxants (peripherally-acting) and cholinesterase inhibitors 

Vecuronium 
Powder for injection: 10 mg (bromide) in vial. 

Vecuronium is a representative non-depolarizing muscle relaxant. Various medicines 
can serve as alternatives. 

Vecuronium is a complementary list non-depolarizing muscle relaxant. 

Uses: muscle relaxation during surgery. 
Contraindications: respiratory insufficiency or pulmonary disease; dehydrated 
or severely ill patients; myasthenia gravis or other neuromuscular disorders. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); burns patients (possibly 
increase dose); electrolyte disturbances; respiratory acidosis or hypokalaemia 
(possibly decrease dose); history of asthma; severe obesity (may require 
maintenance of adequate airway and ventilation support); pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Intubation, by intravenous injection, ADULT and CHILD over 5 months, initially  
80–100 micrograms/kg; usual maintenance dose, 20–30 micrograms/kg; 
CHILD 1–4 months, initially 10–20 micrograms/kg, followed by incremental 
doses according to response. 

NOTE. To avoid excessive dosage in obese patients, dose should be calculated on the 
basis of ideal body weight. 

Muscle relaxation, by intravenous infusion, ADULT, initially,  
40–100 micrograms/kg, then 0.8–1.4 micrograms/kg/minute. 

Adverse effects: minimal release of histamine; rarely hypersensitivity reactions 
including bronchospasm, hypotension, tachycardia, oedema, erythema, and 
pruritus). 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 431 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

 

 

 

SECTION 21:  
Ophthalmological preparations 

21.1 Anti-infective agents 433 

21.2 Anti-inflammatory agents 436 

21.3 Local anaesthetics 437 

21.4 Miotics and antiglaucoma medicines 437 

21.5 Mydriatics 440 

432 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

Administration of eye preparations  

Preparations for use in the eye should be sterile when issued. Use of single-
application containers is preferable; multiple-application preparations include 
the antimicrobial preservatives and when used particular care should be taken 
to prevent contamination of the contents, for example, by avoiding contact 
between the applicator and the eye or other surfaces.  
Eye drops are generally instilled into the lower conjunctival sac which is 
accessed by gently pulling down the lower eyelid to form a pocket into which 
one drop is instilled. The eye should be kept closed for as long as possible after 
application, preferably 1–2 minutes. A small amount of eye ointment is applied 
similarly; the ointment melts rapidly and blinking helps to spread it.  
When two different eye drops are required at the same time, dilution and 
overflow may occur if one immediately follows the other; an interval of at least 
five minutes should therefore be allowed between the two applications.  
Systemic absorption, which may occur after topical application of eye drops, 
can be minimized by using the finger to compress the lacrimal sac at the 
medial canthus for at least one minute after instillation of the drops. This helps 
block the passage of the drops through the naso-lacrimal duct.  

Performance of skilled tasks 

Application of eye preparations may cause blurring of vision which is generally 
transient; patients should be advised not to carry out skilled tasks, such as 
operating machinery or driving, until their vision has cleared. 

21.1 Anti-infective agents 

Blepharitis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, and endophthalmitis are common acute 
infections of the eye, all of which can be treated topically. However, in some 
cases, for example, in gonococcal conjunctivitis, both topical and systemic 
anti-infective treatment may be necessary. Blepharitis and conjunctivitis are 
often caused by staphylococcus, while keratitis and endophthalmitis may be 
bacterial, viral, or fungal. Bacterial blepharitis is treated with an antibacterial 
eye ointment or drops. Although most cases of acute bacterial conjunctivitis 
may resolve spontaneously, anti-infective treatment shortens the infectious 
process and prevents complications. Acute infective conjunctivitis is treated 
with antibacterial eye drops by day and eye ointment applied at night. A poor 
response may indicate viral or allergic conjunctivitis. Keratitis requires 
immediate specialist treatment.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 433 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

Aciclovir is an antiviral used in the treatment of keratitis due to herpes simplex 
virus. Lesions usually heal after 5–9 days of treatment. For systemic treatment 
of keratitis with antivirals, see section 6.4.1.   
Gentamicin is a broad-spectrum bactericidal aminoglycoside antibiotic with 
particular activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Neisseria gonorrhoea and other 
bacteria that may be implicated in blepharitis or conjunctivitis. Topical 
application may lead to systemic absorption and possible adverse effects.  
Tetracycline is a broad spectrum antibiotic with activity against many Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria including N. gonorrhoea, and most 
chlamydia, rickettsia, mycoplasma and spirochetes. Ophthalmic tetracycline is 
used in blepharitis, conjunctivitis, and keratitis produced by susceptible 
bacteria. Tetracycline is also used in the treatment of trachoma caused by 
Chlamydia trachomatis and in the prophylaxis of neonatal conjunctivitis 
(ophthalmia neonatorum) caused by N. gonorrhoea and C. trachomatis. 

Aciclovir 
Ointment: 3% W/W. 

Uses: keratitis caused by herpes simplex; systemic herpes simplex infections 
(section 6.4.1).  

ADMINISTRATION. Herpes simplex keratitis, apply directly to the eye, ADULT and 
CHILD, 1 cm of ointment 5 times daily; continue for at least 3 days after healing is 
complete. 

Adverse effects: local irritation including transient mild stinging, inflammation; 
superficial punctuate keratopathy reported; very rarely hypersensitivity 
reactions including angioedema. 

Gentamicin 
Solution (eye drops): 0.3% (sulfate). 

Gentamicin is a representative ophthalmic antibacterial. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: blepharitis; bacterial conjunctivitis; systemic bacterial infections 
(section 6.2.2). 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to aminoglycoside group of antibiotics 
Precautions: prolonged use may lead to skin sensitization and emergence of 
resistant organisms including fungi; discontinue if there is purulent 
discharge, inflammation or exacerbation of pain. 

434 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

ADMINISTRATION. Mild to moderate infection, by ocular instillation, ADULT and 
CHILD, 1 drop every 2 hours, reducing frequency as infection is controlled, then 
continue for 48 hours after healing is complete. 

Severe infection, by ocular instillation, ADULT and CHILD, 1 drop every hour, 
reducing frequency as infection is controlled, then continue for 48 hours 
after healing is complete. 

Adverse effects: burning, stinging, itching, dermatitis. 

Tetracycline 
Eye ointment: 1% (hydrochloride). 

Tetracycline is a representative ophthalmic antibacterial. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: superficial bacterial infection of the eye; mass treatment of trachoma in 
endemic areas; prophylaxis of neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia 
neonatorum) due to Neisseria gonorrhoea or Chlamydia trachomatis. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to tetracycline group of antibiotics. 
Precautions: prolonged use may lead to overgrowth of non-susceptible 
organisms. 

Administration:  
Superficial bacterial infection, apply directly to the eye, ADULT and CHILD aged 
over 8 years, 1 application of ointment 3–4 times daily. 

Prophylaxis of neonatal conjunctivitis, apply directly to the eye, NEONATE, at 
birth after cleansing eyes with sterile gauze, 1 application of ointment into 
each eye; close eyelids and massage gently to aid spread of ointment. 

Trachoma, intermittent treatment, apply directly to the eye, ADULT and CHILD, 
1 application of ointment into each eye either twice daily for 5 days or once 
daily for 10 days, every month for 6 consecutive months each year, repeated 
as necessary. 

Trachoma, continuous intensive treatment, apply directly to the eye, ADULT and 
CHILD, 1 application of ointment into each eye twice daily for at least 
6 weeks. 

Adverse effects: rash; rarely stinging, and burning. 
 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 435 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

21.2. Anti-inflammatory agents 

Ophthalmic corticosteroids should only be used under supervision of an 
ophthalmologist as inappropriate use is potentially blinding. Dangers include 
the development of open-angle glaucoma (chronic simple glaucoma) and 
cataracts, and the aggravation of a simple herpes simplex epithelial lesions into 
extensive corneal ulcers and subsequent permanent corneal scarring, with 
possible damage to vision and even loss of the eye. 
Corticosteroids such as prednisolone are useful in the treatment of 
inflammatory eye conditions including uveitis and scleritis. They are also used 
for reducing postoperative ocular inflammation. Before administration of an 
ophthalmic corticosteroid, the possibility of bacterial, viral, or fungal infection 
should be excluded. Treatment should be with the lowest effective dose for 
the shortest possible time; if long-term therapy (more than 6 weeks) is 
unavoidable, withdrawal of an ophthalmic corticosteroid should be gradual to 
avoid relapse. 

Prednisolone 
Solution (eye drops): 0.5% (sodium phosphate). 

Prednisolone is a representative ophthalmic corticosteroid. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: short-term local treatment of inflammation of the eye; malignant disease 
(section 8.3); suppression of inflammatory and allergic reactions (sections 3 
and 18.1). 

Contraindications: undiagnosed “red eye” caused by herpetic keratitis; 
glaucoma. 

Precautions: cataract; corneal thinning, corneal or conjunctival infection; 
discontinue treatment if no improvement within 7 days; risk of adrenal 
suppression after prolonged use in infants. 

Administration: 

NOTE. Use only under the supervision of an ophthalmologist. 

Inflammation of the eye, by ocular instillation, ADULT and CHILD, 1 drop every 
1–2 hours, reducing frequency as inflammation is controlled. 

Adverse effects: secondary ocular infection; impaired corneal healing (due to 
corneal thinning), optic nerve damage, cataract; glaucoma, mydriasis, ptosis, 
epithelial punctate keratitis, delayed hypersensitivity reactions including 
burning, and stinging. 

436 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

21.3 Local anaesthetics 

Topical local anaesthetics are employed for simple ophthalmological 
procedures and for short operative procedures involving the cornea and 
conjunctiva. Tetracaine, available in a 0.5% ophthalmic solution, provides a 
rapid local anaesthesia which lasts for 15 minutes or more. Prolonged or 
unsupervised use of tetracaine is not recommended. 

Tetracaine 
Solution (eye drops): 0.5% (hydrochloride). 

Also known as Amethocaine. 

Tetracaine is a representative ophthalmic local anaesthetic. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: short-acting local anaesthesia of the cornea and conjunctiva. 
Contraindications: hypersensitivity to ester-type local anaesthetics; eye 
inflammation or infection. 

Precautions: avoid prolonged use (risk of severe keratitis, permanent corneal 
opacification, scarring, and delayed corneal healing); protect eye from dust 
and bacterial contamination until sensation is fully restored. 

Administration:  

Local anaesthesia, by ocular instillation, ADULT and CHILD, 1 drop. 
Adverse effects: burning, stinging, redness; rarely allergic reactions may occur. 

21.4 Miotics and antiglaucoma medicines 

Glaucoma is normally associated with raised intraocular pressure and eventual 
damage to the optic nerve, which may result in blindness. The rise in pressure 
is almost always due to reduced outflow of aqueous humour, the inflow 
remaining constant. The most common condition is chronic open-angle 
glaucoma (chronic simple glaucoma) in which the intraocular pressure 
increases gradually and the condition is usually asymptomatic until well 
advanced. In contrast, angle-closure glaucoma (closed-angle glaucoma) usually 
occurs as an acute emergency resulting from a rapid rise in intraocular pressure; 
if treatment is delayed, chronic angle-closure glaucoma may develop. In ocular 
hypertension, intraocular pressure is raised without signs of optic nerve 
damage.   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 437 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

Drugs used in the treatment of glaucoma lower the intraocular pressure by a 
variety of mechanisms including reducing the secretion of aqueous humour by 
the ciliary body, or increasing the outflow of the aqueous humour by the 
opening of the trabecular network. Antiglaucoma drugs used include a beta-
blocker (beta-adrenoceptor antagonist), a miotic, or a sympathomimetic such 
as epinephrine (section 21.5); systemic administration of a carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor may be used as an adjunct.   
Timolol is a non-selective beta-blocker that reduces the secretion of aqueous 
humour. A beta-blocker, applied topically, is usually the drug of choice for 
both initial and maintenance treatment of chronic open-angle glaucoma. If 
further reduction in intraocular pressure is required a miotic, a 
sympathomimetic, or a systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitor may be used 
together with timolol. In angle-closure glaucoma, however timolol should 
always be used with a miotic, not alone. Since systemic absorption can occur, 
an ophthalmic beta-blocker should not be used in patients with asthma or a 
history of obstructive airways disease, unless no alternative is available; in such 
cases precautions should be taken to guard against bronchospasm.   
A miotic such as pilocarpine, through its parasympathomimetic action, 
contracts the iris sphincter muscle and the ciliary muscle, and opens the 
trabecular network. It is used in chronic open-angle glaucoma either alone or, 
if required, with a beta-blocker, epinephrine, or a systemic carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor. Pilocarpine is used with systemic acetazolamide in an acute attack of 
angle-closure glaucoma prior to surgery; however, it is not advisable to use 
pilocarpine after surgery because of a risk of posterior synechiae forming. 
Systemic absorption of topically applied pilocarpine can occur producing 
muscarinic adverse effects.   
Acetazolamide, by reducing carbonic anhydrase in the eye, reduces the 
production of aqueous humour and so reduces intraocular pressure. It is used 
systemically as an adjunct in chronic open-angle glaucoma unresponsive to 
treatment with topically applied antiglaucoma drugs. Prolonged therapy with 
acetazolamide is not normally recommended, but if treatment is unavoidable 
blood counts and plasma electrolyte concentrations should be monitored. 
Acetazolamide is also used as part of emergency treatment for an acute attack 
of angle-closure glaucoma; however, it should not be used in chronic angle-
closure glaucoma as it may mask deterioration of the condition. 
 
 
 
 
 

438 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

Acetazolamide 
Tablet: 250 mg. 

Uses: as an adjunct in the treatment of chronic open-angle glaucoma; 
secondary glaucoma; as part of preoperative treatment of acute angle-
closure glaucoma. 

Contraindications: hypersensitivity to sulfonamides; chronic angle-closure 
glaucoma (may mask deterioration); hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, 
hyperchloraemic acidosis; renal impairment (Appendix 4); severe hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5). 

Precautions: the elderly; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); diabetes mellitus; pulmonary obstruction; monitor blood 
count and electrolytes if used for long periods; interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  

Chronic open-angle glaucoma, secondary glaucoma, by mouth, ADULT, 0.25–1 g 
daily in divided doses. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, taste disturbances; loss of 
appetite, paraesthesia, flushing, headache, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, 
depression; thirst, polyuria; reduced libido; metabolic acidosis and 
electrolyte disturbances on long-term therapy; occasionally drowsiness, 
confusion, hearing disturbances, urticaria, melaena, glycosuria, haematuria, 
abnormal liver function, renal calculi, blood disorders (including 
agranulocytosis and thrombocytopenia), and rash (including Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis); transient myopia 
reported. 

Pilocarpine 
Solution (eye drops): 2%; 4% (hydrochloride or nitrate). 

Pilocarpine is a representative miotic. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: chronic open-angle glaucoma, ocular hypertension; emergency treatment 
of acute angle-closure glaucoma; to antagonize effects of mydriasis and 
cycloplegia following surgery or ophthalmoscopic examination. 

Contraindications: acute iritis, acute uveitis, anterior uveitis, some forms of 
secondary glaucoma; acute inflammation of anterior segment; use not 
advisable after angle-closure surgery (risk of posterior synechiae). 

Precautions: retinal disease, conjunctival or corneal damage; monitor 
intraocular pressure in chronic open-angle glaucoma and in long-term 
treatment; cardiac disease, hypertension, asthma, peptic ulceration, urinary 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 439 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

tract obstruction, Parkinson disease; withdraw treatment if symptoms of 
systemic toxicity develop. 

SKILLED TASKS. Causes difficulty with dark adaptation; may cause accommodation 
spasm. Advise patients not to carry out skilled tasks, for example, operating machinery 
or driving until vision is clear. 
Administration: 

Chronic open-angle glaucoma, by ocular instillation, ADULT, 1 drop (2% or 4% 
solution) up to 4 times daily. 

Acute angle-closure glaucoma (before surgery), by ocular instillation, ADULT, 
1 drop (2% solution) every 10 minutes for 30–60 minutes, then 1 drop 
every 1–3 hours until intraocular pressure subsides. 

Adverse effects: eye pain, blurred vision, ciliary spasm, lacrimation, myopia, 
browache; conjunctival vascular congestion, superficial keratitis, vitreous 
haemorrhage, and increased pupillary block reported; lens opacities 
(following prolonged use); rarely systemic effects including hypertension, 
tachycardia, bronchial spasm, pulmonary oedema, salivation, sweating, 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea. 

Timolol 
Solution (eye drops): 0.25%; 0.5% (as maleate). 

Timolol is a representative ophthalmic beta-blocker. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: ocular hypertension; chronic open-angle glaucoma, aphakic glaucoma, 
some secondary glaucomas. 

Contraindications: uncontrolled heart failure, bradycardia, heart block; asthma 
or history of obstructive airways disease (see introductory note above). 

Precautions: elderly (risk of keratitis); in angle-closure glaucoma, use with a 
miotic, and not alone; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Administration:  

Ocular hypertension, chronic open-angle glaucoma, aphakic glaucoma, some 
secondary glaucomas, by ocular instillation, ADULT, 1 drop (0.25% or 0.5%) 
twice daily. 

Adverse effects: stinging, burning, pain, itching, erythema, transient dryness, 
allergic blepharitis, transient conjunctivitis, keratitis, decreased corneal 
sensitivity, diplopia, ptosis; systemic effects, particularly on the pulmonary, 
cardiovascular and central nervous systems, may follow absorption. 

 

440 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

21.5 Mydriatics 

Antimuscarinics, by blocking the cholinergic effects of acetylcholine, paralyse 
the pupillary constrictor muscles causing dilation of the pupil (mydriasis) and 
paralyse the ciliary muscles resulting in paralysis of accommodation 
(cycloplegia). Mydriasis may precipitate acute angle-closure glaucoma 
particularly in the elderly or long-sighted patients. In patients with dark iridic 
pigmentation, higher concentrations of mydriatic drugs are usually required 
and care should be taken to avoid overdosing. 
Atropine is a long-acting antimuscarinic that is used for cycloplegic refraction 
procedures, particularly in children. It is also used to immobilize the ciliary 
muscle and iris, and to prevent formation of posterior synechiae in the 
treatment of inflammatory eye disorders such as iritis and uveitis. 
The sympathomimetic drug, epinephrine (adrenaline) probably acts by 
reducing the rate of production of aqueous humour and increasing its outflow 
through the trabecular network. Epinephrine is usually used with a miotic, a 
beta-blocker, or a systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitor in the treatment of 
chronic open-angle glaucoma; however, because epinephrine is also a mydriatic, 
it is contraindicated for angle-closure glaucoma unless an iridectomy has been 
carried out.   

Atropine 
Solution (eye drops): 0.1%; 0.5%; 1% (sulfate). 

Uses: iritis, uveitis; cycloplegic refraction procedures; premedication 
(section 1.3); organophosphate poisoning (section 4.2). 

Contraindications: angle-closure glaucoma. 
Precautions: use may precipitate acute attack of angle-closure glaucoma, 
particularly in the elderly or long-sighted; infants under 3 months (risk of 
systemic effects with eye drops; eye ointment preferred). 

SKILLED TASKS. May cause sensitivity to light and blurred vision. Advise patients 
not to carry out skilled tasks, for example, operating machinery or driving, until vision 
is clear. 
Administration: 

Cycloplegic refraction, by ocular instillation, ADULT, 1 drop (1% solution) twice 
daily for 1–2 days before procedure or a single application of 1 drop (1% 
solution) 1 hour before procedure; CHILD under 3 months, see Precautions; 
CHILD 3 months–1 year, 1 drop (0.1% solution)(1–5 years, 0.1–0.5% 
solution; over 5 years, 0.5–1% solution) twice daily for 1–3 days before 
procedure with a further dose given 1 hour before procedure. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 441 



21. Ophthalmological preparations 

Iritis, uveitis, by ocular instillation, ADULT, 1 drop (0.5% or 1% solution) up to 
4 times daily; CHILD, 1 drop (0.5% or 1%) up to 3 times daily. 

Adverse effects: transient stinging and raised intraocular pressure; local 
irritation, hyperaemia, oedema, and conjunctivitis (on prolonged 
administration); contact dermatitis; systemic toxicity (in the very young and 
the elderly). 

Epinephrine (adrenaline) 
Solution (eye drops): 2% (as hydrochloride). 

Epinephrine is a complementary list medicine for use as a mydriatic when medicines in 
the main list cannot be made available.   

Uses: chronic open-angle glaucoma, ocular hypertension (section 21.4); 
anaphylaxis (section 3); cardiac arrest (section 12.2).   

Contraindications: angle-closure glaucoma, unless an iridectomy has been 
carried out.   

Precautions: hypertension, heart disease, aneurysm, arrhythmia, tachycardia, 
hyperthyroidism, cerebral arteriosclerosis, diabetes mellitus. 

Administration:  
Chronic open-angle glaucoma, by ocular instillation, ADULT, 1 drop (0.5% or 1% 
solution) 1–2 times daily. 

Adverse effects: stinging, blurred vision, photophobia, eye pain, conjunctival 
hyperaemia, headache or browache; occasionally conjunctival sensitization 
and local skin reactions; conjunctival pigmentation and macular oedema in 
aphakia (after prolonged use); systemic adverse reactions are rare following 
topical use at normal dosage but tachycardia, hypertension, arrhythmia, 
dizziness, and sweating have been reported. 

442 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

 

 

 

SECTION 22:  
Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

22.1 Oxytocics 444 

22.2 Antioxytocics (tocolytics) 450 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 443 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

Several medicines may be used to modify uterine contractions. These include 
the oxytocic drugs, which are used to stimulate uterine contractions both in 
induction of labour and in the control of postpartum haemorrhage, and the 
beta2-adrenoceptor agonists, which are used to relax the uterus and prevent 
premature labour. 

22.1 Oxytocics 

Termination of pregnancy  

Termination of pregnancy must only be carried out where facilities for the 
management of complications are readily available and where the procedure is 
permitted under national law and is culturally acceptable. Medical abortion may 
be induced by the sequential use of a single oral dose of mifepristone followed 
by vaginal administration of the prostaglandin, misoprostol. Misoprostol on its 
own is only a weak abortifacient and is often ineffective when used alone for 
the termination of pregnancy. 
Mifepristone, an antiprogestogenic steroid, facilitates medical termination of 
pregnancy by sensitizing the myometrium to prostaglandin-induced 
contractions and, therefore when used together with misoprostol, abortion 
occurs in a shorter time and with a lower dose of the prostaglandin.  

Induction and augmentation of labour  

Prostaglandins, including misoprostol, are effective for the induction of labour. 
Misoprostol is usually administered in a low dose as a vaginal tablet; 
alternatively it can be given by mouth but this route is less effective and 
requires a larger dose. Misoprostol is associated with uterine hyperstimulation; 
it can increase the risk of rupture and associated complications in women who 
have undergone multiple pregnancies or who have uterine scarring from 
surgery or caesarean section. 

Postpartum haemorrhage 

Ergometrine and oxytocin differ in their actions on the uterus. In moderate 
doses, oxytocin produces slow generalized contractions with full relaxation in 
between; ergometrine produces faster contractions superimposed on a tonic 
contraction. High doses of both substances produce sustained tonic 
contractions. Oxytocin is now recommended for routine use in the control of 
postpartum and post-abortion haemorrhage since it is more stable than 

444 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

ergometrine. However, ergometrine may be used if oxytocin is not available or 
in emergency situations. 

Ergometrine 
Injection: 200 micrograms (hydrogen maleate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

Ergometrine is subject to international control under the United Nations Convention 
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (1988). 

Ergometrine is a representative oxytocic drug. Various drugs can serve as alternatives. 

NOTE. Injection requires transport by “cold chain” and refrigerated storage. 

Uses: prevention and treatment of postpartum and post-abortion haemorrhage 
in emergency situations and where oxytocin not available. 

Contraindications: induction of labour; first and second stages of labour; 
vascular disease, severe cardiac disease especially angina pectoris; severe 
hypertension; severe renal and hepatic impairment; sepsis; eclampsia. 

Precautions: cardiac disease, hypertension, hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
renal impairment (Appendix 4); multiple pregnancy, porphyria; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage, by intramuscular injection, 

ADULT and ADOLESCENT, 200 micrograms when the anterior shoulder is 
delivered or immediately after birth. 

Excessive uterine bleeding, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, 
250–500 micrograms when the anterior shoulder is delivered or immediately 
after birth. 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, abdominal 
pain, chest pain, palpitations, dyspnoea, bradycardia, transient hypertension, 
vasoconstriction; stroke, myocardial infarction and pulmonary oedema also 
reported. 

Mifepristone + misoprostol 
Tablet 200 mg - tablet 200 micrograms. 

Mifepristone is a complementary list medicine for medical termination of 
pregnancy of up to 63 days gestation where this is permitted under national 
law and where culturally acceptable. 
Uses: medical termination of intrauterine pregnancy of up to 63 days gestation 
with misoprostol. 

Contraindications: uncontrolled severe asthma; suspected ectopic pregnancy 
(use other specific means of termination); chronic adrenal failure, porphyria. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 445 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

Precautions: if treatment fails, it is essential that pregnancy is terminated by 
another method; asthma (avoid if severe); haemorrhagic disorders and 
anticoagulant therapy; prosthetic heart valve or history of endocarditis 
(antibacterial prophylaxis recommended); smokers aged over 35 years 
(increased risk of cardiovascular events); adrenal suppression (may require 
treatment with a corticosteroid); not recommended in hepatic or renal 
impairment; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid use of acetylsalicylic acid 
(aspirin) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines for analgesia; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 

IMPORTANT. For warnings relating to the use of misoprostol in a patient undergoing 
induction of abortion with a combination of mifepristone and misoprostol, see under 
Misoprostol. 
Dose:  

Medical termination of intrauterine pregnancy of up to 63 days gestation, by 
mouth, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, mifepristone, 200 mg as a single dose, 
followed 36–48 hours later (unless abortion already complete) by 
misoprostol, 800 micrograms vaginally and individual observed for at least 6 
hours (or until bleeding or pain at acceptable level) with follow-up visit 10–
15 days later to verify complete expulsion (if treatment fails essential that 
pregnancy terminated by another method). 

NOTE. Careful monitoring essential for 6 hours after the administration of 
misoprostol (risk of hypotension). 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, gastrointestinal cramps; uterine 
contractions, vaginal bleeding (sometimes severe); less commonly 
hypersensitivity reactions including rash, urticaria, and facial oedema; rarely 
malaise, headache, fever, hot flushes, dizziness, chills. 

Misoprostol is a complementary drug for medical termination of pregnancy of 
up to 63 days gestation where this is permitted under national law and where 
culturally acceptable, and for induction of labour.  
Uses: induction of labour; with mifepristone, medical termination of 
intrauterine pregnancy of up to 63 days gestation. 

Contraindications:  
INDUCTION OF LABOUR. Placenta praevia or unexplained vaginal bleeding 
during pregnancy, ruptured membranes, major cephalopelvic disproportion or fetal 
malpresentation, history of caesarean section or major uterine surgery, untreated 
pelvic infection, fetal distress, grand multiparas and multiple pregnancy, history of 
difficult or traumatic delivery. 

MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY. See under Mifepristone. 

Precautions: conditions where hypotension might precipitate severe 
complications (for example cerebrovascular disease, cardiovascular disease) 

446 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY. History of caesarean section or 
major uterine surgery, grand multiparas (risk of rupture). 

IMPORTANT. For warnings relating to use of mifepristone in a patient undergoing 
induction of abortion with misoprostol, see under Mifepristone. 

Dose:  
Induction of labour, by vagina, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, initially 
25 micrograms repeated after 6 hours if necessary, if still no response 
increase to 50 micrograms every 6 hours for up to 4 doses. 
NOTE. Should it be necessary to continue induction of labour with oxytocin, 
administration of oxytocin should be avoided within 8 hours of using misoprostol 

Medical termination of intrauterine pregnancy of up to 63 days gestation, 
under close medical supervision, by vagina, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, 
misoprostol 800 micrograms 36–48 hours after mifepristone 200 mg as a 
single dose by mouth (unless abortion already complete), and individual 
observed for at least 6 hours (or until bleeding or pain at acceptable level) 
with follow-up visit 10–15 days later to verify complete expulsion (if 
treatment fails essential that pregnancy terminated by another method). 

Administration:  

For medical termination of pregnancy oral tablets may be administered 
vaginally if a suitable vaginal preparation is not available; for induction of 
labour, low-dose vaginal tablets should be used, but if these are not 
available, 100-microgram oral tablets can be divided to the required dose 
and administered vaginally. 

Adverse effects: uterine hyperstimulation, uterine rupture, fetal distress; less 
commonly in obstetric setting diarrhoea, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, 
flatulence, nausea and vomiting, rash, dizziness. 

Misoprostol 
Vaginal tablet: 25 micrograms. 

Misoprostol is a complementary list medicine for medical termination of pregnancy of 
up to 63 days gestation where this is permitted under national law and where it is 
culturally acceptable, and for induction of labour. 

Uses: induction of labour; medical termination of intrauterine pregnancy of up 
to 63 days gestation with mifepristone. 

Contraindications:  
INDUCTION OF LABOUR. Placenta praevia or unexplained vaginal bleeding 
during pregnancy, ruptured membranes, major cephalopelvic disproportion or fetal 
malpresentation, history of caesarean section or major uterine surgery, untreated 
pelvic infection, fetal distress, grand multiparas and multiple pregnancy, history of 
difficult or traumatic delivery. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 447 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY. See under Mifepristone. 

Precautions: induction of labour conditions where hypotension might 
precipitate severe complications (for example, cerebrovascular disease or 
cardiovascular disease). 
MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY. History of caesarean section or 
major uterine surgery, grand multiparas (risk of rupture). 

IMPORTANT. For warnings relating to the use of mifepristone in a patient 
undergoing induction of abortion with a combination of misoprostol and 
mifepristone, see under Mifepristone. 

Dose:  
Induction of labour, by vagina, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, initially 
25 micrograms, repeated after 6 hours if necessary; if still no response, 
increase to 50 micrograms every 6 hours for up to 4 doses. 
NOTE. Should it be necessary to continue induction of labour with oxytocin, 
administration of oxytocin should be avoided within 8 hours of using misoprostol. 

Medical termination of intrauterine pregnancy of up to 63 days gestation, by 
vagina, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, misoprostol, 800 micrograms 36–48 hours 
after mifepristone, 200 mg as a single dose by mouth (unless abortion 
already complete) and individual observed for at least 6 hours (or until 
bleeding or pain at acceptable level) with follow-up visit 10–15 days later to 
verify complete expulsion (if treatment fails essential that pregnancy 
terminated by another method). 

Administration:  

For medical termination of pregnancy, oral tablets may be administered 
vaginally if a suitable vaginal preparation is not available; for induction of 
labour, low-dose vaginal tablets should be used, but if these are not available, 
100-microgram oral tablets [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] can 
be divided to the required dose and administered vaginally. 
Adverse effects: uterine hyperstimulation, uterine rupture, fetal distress; less 
commonly in obstetric setting diarrhoea, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, 
flatulence, nausea and vomiting, rash, dizziness. 

Oxytocin 
Injection: 10 IU in 1-ml ampoule. 

Uses: routine prevention and treatment of postpartum and post-abortion 
haemorrhage; induction of labour.   

Contraindications: hypertonic uterine contractions, mechanical obstruction to 
delivery, fetal distress; any condition where spontaneous labour or vaginal 
delivery inadvisable; avoid prolonged administration in oxytocin-resistant 

448 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

uterine inertia, in severe pre-eclamptic toxaemia, or in severe cardiovascular 
disease; major cephalopelvic disproportion.   

Precautions: induction or enhancement of labour in presence of borderline 
cephalopelvic disproportion (avoid if significant); mild to moderate 
pregnancy-associated hypertension or cardiac disease; age over 35 years; 
history of low-uterine segment caesarean section; avoid tumultuous labour 
if fetal death or meconium-stained amniotic fluid (risk of amniotic fluid 
embolism) occurs; water intoxication and hyponatraemia (avoid large 
volume infusions and restrict fluid intake); caudal block anaesthesia (risk of 
severe hypertension due to enhanced vasopressor effect of 
sympathomimetics); interactions: Appendix 1.   

Dose:  
Induction of labour, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, initially 
0.001–0.002 IU/minute increased in 0.001–0.002 IU/minute increments at 
intervals of 30 minutes until up to 3–4 contractions occur every 10 minutes; 
maximum rate, 0.02 IU/minute.   
NOTE. The dose shown above is suitable for use in hospital where equipment to 
control the infusion rate is available; alternative recommendations may be suitable 
for other settings (consult Managing complications in pregnancy and childbirth: A guide for 
midwives and doctors. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2000).    

IMPORTANT. Careful monitoring of fetal heart rate and uterine motility is 
essential for dose titration (avoid bolus intravenous injection during labour); 
discontinue immediately in uterine hyperactivity or fetal distress.  

Prevention of postpartum haemorrhage, by intramuscular injection, ADULT and 
ADOLESCENT, 10 IU when the anterior shoulder is delivered or immediately 
after birth. 

Prevention of postpartum haemorrhage, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT and 
ADOLESCENT, 5 IU when the anterior shoulder is delivered or immediately 
after birth. 

Treatment of postpartum haemorrhage, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT and 
ADOLESCENT, 5–10 IU or by intramuscular injection, ADULT and ADOLESCENT, 
10 IU, followed in severe cases by a total of 40 IU, by intravenous infusion, at a 
rate of 0.02–0.04 IU/minute; this should be started after the placenta is 
delivered.   
NOTE. For further details on management of postpartum haemorrhage consult 
Managing complications in pregnancy and childbirth: A guide for midwives and doctors. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2000.  

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 
Prolonged intravenous administration at high doses with large volume of fluid (for 
example, in inevitable or missed abortion, or in postpartum haemorrhage) may cause 
water intoxication with hyponatraemia. To avoid this, use electrolyte-containing 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 449 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

diluent (not glucose), increase oxytocin concentration to reduce fluid, and restrict 
fluid intake by mouth; monitor fluid, and electrolytes. 

Adverse effects: uterine spasm, and uterine hyperstimulation (usually with 
excessive doses; may cause fetal distress, asphyxia and death, or may lead to 
hypertonicity, tetanic contractions, soft-tissue damage, or uterine rupture); 
water intoxication and hyponatraemia (with high doses and large-volume 
infusions); nausea, vomiting, arrhythmias, rash and anaphylactoid reactions 
also reported. 

22.2 Antioxytocics (tocolytics) 

Premature labour 

Nifedipine, a dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker which relaxes the uterus, 
can be used to postpone labour in uncomplicated cases of premature labour. It 
can permit a delay in delivery of at least 48 hours. The greatest benefit is 
obtained by using this delay to administer corticosteroid therapy or to 
implement other measures known to improve perinatal health. 

Nifedipine 
Immediate release capsule: 10 mg. 

Uses: uncomplicated premature labour between 24–33 weeks gestation. 
Contraindications: cardiogenic shock; advanced aortic stenosis; within 
1 month of myocardial infarction; unstable or acute attacks of angina; 
porphyria. 

Precautions: stop if ischaemic pain occurs shortly after starting treatment; 
poor cardiac reserve; heart failure or significantly impaired left ventricular 
function; severe hypotension; hepatic impairment (reduce dose; 
Appendix 5); diabetes mellitus; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid grapefruit 
juice (may affect nifedipine metabolism); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Premature labour, sublingually (immediate-release capsules), ADULT, initially 
10 mg every 15 minutes if necessary, up to a maximum of 40 mg in the first 
hour, then 60–160 mg daily in 3–4 divided doses by mouth (sustained-release 
tablets), adjusted to uterine activity. 

Adverse effects: headache, flushing, dizziness, lethargy; tachycardia, 
palpitations; exaggerated fall in blood pressure and reflex tachycardia (may 
lead to myocardial or cerebrovascular ischaemia); gravitational oedema; rash 

450 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



22. Oxytocics and antioxytocics 

(erythema multiforme reported), pruritus, urticaria; nausea, constipation or 
diarrhoea; increased frequency of micturition; eye pain, visual disturbances; 
gum hyperplasia; asthenia, paraesthesia, myalgia, tremor, gynaecomastia; 
depression, telangiectasis, cholestasis, and jaundice reported. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 451 



23. Peritoneal dialysis solution 

 

 

 

 

SECTION 23:  
Peritoneal dialysis solution 

 

452 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



23. Peritoneal dialysis solution 

Solutions for peritoneal dialysis are preparations for intraperitoneal use which 
contain electrolytes in a similar concentration to that found in plasma, and also 
glucose or another suitable osmotic agent. Peritoneal dialysis solutions always 
contain sodium, chloride, and hydrogen carbonate (or a precursor); they may 
also contain calcium, magnesium, and rarely potassium. 
In renal failure, haemodialysis is the preferred method to correct the 
accumulation of toxins, electrolytes, and fluid. Peritoneal dialysis is less 
efficient than haemodialysis, but it is preferred in children, diabetic patients, 
and patients with unstable cardiovascular disease; it is also used in patients 
who can manage their condition, or those who live far from a dialysis centre. It 
is unsuitable for patients who have had significant abdominal surgery. 
In peritoneal dialysis, the solution is infused into the peritoneal cavity, where 
exchange of electrolytes takes place by diffusion and convection, and excess 
fluid is removed by osmosis, using the peritoneal membrane as an osmotic 
membrane. There are 2 forms of peritoneal dialysis: 

- continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), in which dialysis is performed manually 
by the patient several times each day;  

- automated peritoneal dialysis (APD), in which dialysis is performed by machine 
overnight.  

The main complication of peritoneal dialysis is peritonitis, which often results 
from poor exchange technique; infections of the catheter exit site may also 
occur, again because of poor technique. With long-term dialysis progressive 
structural changes to the peritoneal membrane occur, ultimately resulting in 
dialysis failure.  

Intraperitoneal dialysis solution (of appropriate composition) 
Parenteral solution. 

Intraperitoneal dialysis solution is a complementary list preparation.  

Uses: to correct electrolyte imbalance and fluid overload, and to remove 
metabolites, in renal failure. 

Contraindications: abdominal sepsis; previous abdominal surgery; severe 
inflammatory bowel disease. 

Precautions: care is required with technique to reduce risk of infection; warm 
dialysis solution to body temperature before use; some drugs may be 
removed by dialysis. 

Dose:  

Individualized according to clinical condition, and based on blood results. 
Adverse effects: infection including peritonitis; hernia; haemoperitoneum; 
hyperglycaemia, protein malnutrition; blocked catheter. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 453 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

 

 

 

SECTION 24:  
Psychotherapeutic medicines 

24.1 Medicines used in psychotic disorders 455 

24.2 Medicines used in mood disorders 460 

24.2.1  Medicines used in depressive disorders 460 

24.2.2  Medicines used in bipolar disorders 463 

24.3 Medicines used in generalized anxiety and 
sleep disorders 468 

24.4 Medicines used for obsessive-compulsive 
disorders and panic attacks 470 

24.5 Medicines used in substance-dependence 
programmes 471 

454 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

24.1 Medicines used in psychotic disorders 

Treatment of psychotic disorders including schizophrenia is both 
pharmacological and psychosocial. Individual and community programmes for 
relearning old skills and developing new ones, and for learning to cope with 
psychotic illness should be initiated. Classes of antipsychotic drugs include the 
phenothiazines (for example, chlorpromazine and fluphenazine), the 
butyrophenones (for example, haloperidol), the thioxanthenes (for example, 
flupentixol) and the newer “atypical” neuroleptics such as clozapine and 
risperidone. The various antipsychotic drugs do not, in general, differ in their 
antipsychotic activity, but rather in the range and quality of their adverse 
effects (see below). 

Acute phase treatment 

The administration of chlorpromazine or haloperidol will relieve symptoms 
such as thought disorders, hallucinations, and delusions, and prevent relapse. 
They are usually less effective in apathetic, withdrawn patients, but they can 
sometimes have an activating influence in such individuals. Patients with acute 
schizophrenia generally respond better to antipsychotic drugs than those with 
chronic symptoms. In the acute phase, chlorpromazine may be administered 
by intramuscular injection. In most cases, however, the intramuscular injection 
is not needed and patients can be treated with an oral dose. Haloperidol may 
be administered in the acute phase. 

Maintenance therapy 

Long-term treatment for schizophrenia may be necessary after the first episode 
to prevent the illness from becoming chronic. 
The lowest possible dose of an antipsychotic drug that will prevent major 
exacerbations of florid symptoms is used for long-term management. Too 
rapid a dose reduction should be avoided. Intramuscular depot preparations of, 
for example, fluphenazine, may be used as an alternative to oral maintenance 
therapy, especially when compliance with oral treatment is unreliable. 
Exacerbations of illness in patients on maintenance drug therapy can be 
precipitated by stress. 
Withdrawal of maintenance drug treatment requires careful surveillance since it 
is not possible to predict the course of the disease and the patient may suffer a 
relapse if treatment is withdrawn inappropriately. Furthermore, the need for 
continuation of treatment may not be evident on withdrawal of treatment 
because relapse may be delayed for several weeks. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 455 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

Adverse effects 

Adverse effects are very common with long-term administration of 
antipsychotic medicines (for specific details, see under each individual drug). 
Treatment of all patients on antipsychotics must be carefully and regularly 
reviewed. Hypotension and interference with temperature regulation, 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome (see note below), and bone marrow 
depression are the most life-threatening adverse effects of antipsychotics. Both 
hypotension and interference with temperature regulation are dose-related, and 
can result in dangerous falls and hypothermia in the elderly. This aspect must 
be considered before prescribing these drugs for patients over 70 years of age. 
Extrapyramidal symptoms are the most troublesome adverse effects of 
antipsychotics and are caused most frequently by the piperazine 
phenothiazines such as fluphenazine, the butyrophenones such as haloperidol, 
and the depot preparations; the newer “atypical” antipsychotics cause fewer 
extrapyramidal symptoms than other antipsychotics. Although easily 
recognized, extrapyramidal symptoms are not so easy to predict because they 
depend on the dose and patient susceptibility as well as the drug. 
Extrapyramidal symptoms consist of: 

– parkinsonian symptoms (including tremor), which may occur more commonly in adults 
or the elderly and may appear gradually; 

– dystonia (abnormal face and body movements) and dyskinesia, which occur more 
commonly in children or young adults and appear after only a few doses; 

– akathisia (restlessness), which characteristically occurs after large initial doses and 
may resemble an exacerbation of the condition being treated; and 

– tardive dyskinesia (rhythmic, involuntary movements of tongue, face, and jaw), which 
usually develops on long-term therapy or with high dosage, but it may develop on 
short-term treatment with low doses — short-lived tardive dyskinesia may occur 
after withdrawal of the drug. 

NEUROLEPTIC MALIGNANT SYNDROME. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 
which is characterized by hypothermia, fluctuating levels of consciousness, muscular 
rigidity, and autonomic dysfunction with pallor, tachycardia, labile blood pressure, 
sweating, and urinary incontinence, is a rare adverse effect of haloperidol and 
chlorpromazine. It is managed by discontinuing the antipsychotic, correcting fluid and 
by electrolyte defects, and by giving bromocriptine [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List] and sometimes dantrolene [not included on the 15th WHO Model List]. 

 

 

 

 

 

456 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

Chlorpromazine 
Injection: 25 mg (hydrochloride/ml in 2-ml ampoule. 
Oral liquid: 25 mg (hydrochloride/5 ml. 
Tablet: 100 mg (hydrochloride). 

Chlorpromazine is a representative antipsychotic. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

WARNING. Owing to the risk of contact sensitization, pharmacists, nurses, and other 
health workers should avoid direct contact with chlorpromazine; tablets should not be 
crushed and solutions should be handled with care. 

Uses: schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, mania, psychomotor 
agitation and violent behaviour; adjunct in severe anxiety. 

Contraindications: impaired consciousness due to central nervous system 
depression; bone marrow depression; phaeochromocytoma. 

Precautions: cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disorders; respiratory disease; 
parkinsonism; epilepsy; acute infections, pregnancy (Appendix 2); 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); renal impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 4); 
hepatic impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 5); history of jaundice; 
leukopenia (monitor blood counts if unexplained fever or infection occur); 
hypothyroidism, myasthenia gravis; prostatic hypertrophy; angle-closure 
glaucoma; the elderly (particularly in very hot or very cold weather; reduce 
dose); avoid abrupt withdrawal; patients should remain supine and blood 
pressure monitored for 30 minutes after intramuscular injection (risk of 
hypotension); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example 
operating machinery or driving. 

Dose:  
Schizophrenia and other psychoses, mania, psychomotor agitation, violent 
behaviour, severe anxiety (adjunct), by mouth: 
ADULT, initially 25 mg 3 times daily or 75 mg at night, adjusted according to 
response to usual maintenance dose of 75–300 mg daily (but up to 1 g daily 
may be required in psychoses); ELDERLY (or debilitated) third to half adult 
dose;  
CHILD (childhood schizophrenia and autism) 1–5 years, 500 micrograms/kg 
every 4–6 hours (maximum 40 mg daily); CHILD 6–12 years, third to half 
adult dose (maximum 75 mg daily). 

For relief of acute symptoms, by deep intramuscular injection, ADULT, 25–50 mg 
every 6–8 hours; CHILD, 1–12 years, 500 micrograms/kg every 6–8 hours 
(1–5 years, maximum, 40 mg daily; 6–12 years, maximum, 75 mg daily) (see 
also Precautions and Adverse effects). 

Adverse effects: extrapyramidal symptoms and on prolonged administration, 
occasionally potentially irreversible tardive dyskinesias (see introductory 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 457 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

note above); hypothermia (occasionally pyrexia), drowsiness, apathy, pallor, 
nightmares, dizziness, excitement, insomnia, headache, confusion, 
depression; more rarely, agitation, EEG changes, convulsions, and nasal 
congestion; anticholinergic symptoms including dry mouth, constipation, 
blurred vision, and difficulty in micturition; hypotension, tachycardia, and 
arrhythmias; ECG changes; respiratory depression; menstrual disturbances, 
galactorrhoea, gynaecomastia, impotence, weight gain; sensitivity reactions 
such as agranulocytosis, leukopenia, leukocytosis, haemolytic anaemia, 
photosensitization, contact sensitization and rash, jaundice, and alterations 
in liver function; neuroleptic malignant syndrome; lupus erythematosus-like 
syndrome; corneal and lens opacities, and purplish pigmentation of the skin, 
cornea, and retina (with prolonged high dosage); intramuscular injection 
may be painful and cause hypotension and tachycardia (see Precautions) and 
nodule formation. 

Fluphenazine 
Injection: 25 mg (decanoate or enantate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

Fluphenazine is a representative depot antipsychotic for use when compliance unlikely 
to be reliable. Various medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: maintenance treatment of schizophrenia and other psychoses. 
Contraindications: children; confusional states; impaired consciousness due to 
central nervous system depression; parkinsonism; intolerance to 
antipsychotics; depression; bone marrow depression; phaeochromocytoma; 
marked cerebral artherosclerosis. 

Precautions: treatment requires careful monitoring for optimum effect; 
administer an initial small test dose as adverse effects are prolonged; 
extrapyramidal symptoms occur frequently; when transferring from oral to 
depot therapy, dosage by mouth should be reduced gradually; 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disorders, respiratory disease; epilepsy; 
acute infections; pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); renal 
impairment (avoid if severe; Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (avoid if 
severe; Appendix 5); history of jaundice; leukopenia (monitor blood counts 
if unexplained fever or infection occur); hypothyroidism; myasthenia gravis; 
prostatic hypertrophy; angle-closure glaucoma; the elderly (reduce dose in 
very hot or very cold weather); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Maintenance in schizophrenia and other psychoses, by deep intramuscular injection 
into gluteal muscle, ADULT, test dose of 12.5 mg (6.25 mg in the ELDERLY), 

458 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

then after 4–7 days, 12.5–100 mg repeated at intervals of 2–5 weeks, 
adjusted according to response; CHILD, not recommended. 

Administration:  

According to manufacturer’s directions. 
Adverse effects: as for Chlorpromazine (see above), but less sedative effects, 
fewer hypotensive and anticholinergic symptoms and a higher incidence of 
extrapyramidal symptoms (most likely to occur a few hours after injection 
and continue for about 2 days but may be delayed); systemic lupus 
erythematosus; pain at injection site, and occasionally erythema, swelling, 
nodules; inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, oedema. 

Haloperidol 
Injection: 5 mg in 1-ml ampoule. 
Tablet: 2 mg; 5 mg. 

Haloperidol is a representative antipsychotic. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, mania, short-term 
adjunctive management of psychomotor agitation, violent behaviour, and 
severe anxiety. 

Contraindications: impaired consciousness due to central nervous system 
depression; bone marrow depression; phaeochromocytoma; porphyria; 
basal ganglia disease. 

Precautions: cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disorders, respiratory disease, 
parkinsonism, epilepsy, acute infections, pregnancy (Appendix 2), 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3), renal and hepatic impairment (avoid if severe; 
Appendices 4 and 5), history of jaundice, leukopenia (blood count required 
if unexplained fever or infection); hypothyroidism, myasthenia gravis, 
prostatic hypertrophy, angle-closure glaucoma; also subarachnoid 
haemorrhage and metabolic disturbances such as hypokalaemia, 
hypocalcaemia, or hypomagnesaemia; the elderly (particularly in very hot or 
very cold weather); children and adolescents; avoid abrupt withdrawal; 
patients should remain supine and the blood pressure monitored for 
30 minutes after intramuscular injection; interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Schizophrenia and other psychoses, mania, short-term adjunctive management 
of psychomotor agitation, violent behaviour, and severe anxiety, by mouth, 
ADULT, 1.5–3 mg 2–3 times daily (half of the adult dose in elderly or 
debilitated patients; 3–5 mg 2–3 times daily in severely affected or resistant 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 459 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

patients; up to 30 mg daily in resistant schizophrenia); CHILD,  
25–50 micrograms/kg daily in 2 divided doses (maximum, 10 mg daily). 

Acute psychotic conditions, by intramuscular injection, ADULT, initially 2–10 mg 
(half of the adult dose in elderly or debilitated patients; up to 18 mg in 
severely affected patients); subsequent doses every 4–8 hours according to 
response (up to every hour if necessary) up to a maximum of 18 mg daily; 
CHILD, not recommended. 

Adverse effects: as for Chlorpromazine (see above), but less sedative effects 
and fewer hypotensive and anticholinergic symptoms; rarely pigmentation 
and photosensitivity reactions rare; extrapyramidal symptoms are common, 
particularly acute dystonia and akathisia (especially in thyrotoxic patients); 
rarely weight loss, and hypoglycaemia, inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
secretion. 

24.2 Medicines used in mood disorders 

Mood disorders can be classified as depression (unipolar disorder) or mania; 
alternating episodes of mania and depression (manic depression) are termed 
bipolar disorder. 
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) has been shown to be rapidly effective in the 
urgent treatment of severe depression. Counselling and psychotherapy have an 
important role in treating some forms of depression. 

24.2.1  Medicines used in depressive disorders 

Tricyclic and related antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) are the most widely used drugs in the treatment of depressive 
disorders. The response to antidepressant therapy is usually delayed, with a lag-
period of up to 2 weeks and at least 6 weeks before maximum improvement 
occurs. It is important to use doses that are sufficiently high for effective 
treatment, but not so high as to cause toxic effects. Low doses should be used 
for initial treatment in the elderly. The use of more than one antidepressant at 
a time is not recommended since this does not enhance effectiveness and it 
may result in enhanced adverse effects or interactions.  
Patients should be reviewed every 1–2 weeks at the start of treatment. 
Treatment should be continued for at least 4 weeks (6 weeks in the elderly) 
before considering a change to another antidepressant because of problems 
with suitability or efficacy. In the case of a partial response, treatment may be 

460 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

continued for a further 2 weeks (or possibly longer in elderly patients as they 
may take longer to respond). Remission usually occurs after 3–12 months. 
Treatment at full therapeutic dose should be continued for at least 6 months, 
but preferably up to 12 months after resolution of symptoms (about 
12 months in the elderly). Treatment should not be withdrawn prematurely, 
otherwise symptoms are likely to recur. Patients with a history of recurrent 
depression should continue to receive maintenance treatment (for at least 
5 years and possibly indefinitely). Lithium may be used as an alternative to 
anti-depressants for maintenance treatment (see section 24.2.2). The lithium 
dose should be reduced gradually over about 4 weeks, or even longer if 
withdrawal symptoms emerge (6 months in patients who have been on long-
term maintenance treatment).  
Tricyclic and related antidepressants can be divided into those with lesser 
sedative effect. Those with sedative properties include amitriptyline and those 
with less sedative effects include imipramine [not included on the 15th WHO 
Model List] . These drugs are most effective in the treatment of depression 
associated with psychomotor and physiological disturbances. Adverse effects 
include anticholinergic (more correctly, antimuscarinic) symptoms of dry 
mouth, blurred vision, constipation, and urinary retention. Arrhythmias and 
heart block can also occur. Minimal quantities of tricyclic antidepressants 
should be prescribed at any one time because their cardiovascular effects are 
dangerous in overdose. Amitriptyline in overdosage is associated with a high 
rate of fatality.  
Fluoxetine is a SSRI which characteristically causes gastrointestinal 
disturbances, sleep disturbances, and hypersensitivity reactions including rash 
(may be a sign of an impending serious systemic reaction and discontinuation 
should be considered) but they are less sedating and have fewer anticholinergic 
(antimuscarinic) and cardiotoxic effects than tricyclic antidepressants. The 
SSRIs are less toxic in overdose than the older tricyclic compounds, but there 
is some concern that SSRIs may increase suicidal ideation, especially in 
children and adolescents.  

Amitriptyline 
Tablet: 25 mg (hydrochloride). 

Amitriptyline is a representative tricyclic antidepressant. Various medicines can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: moderate to severe depression. 
Contraindications: recent myocardial infarction, arrhythmias (especially heart 
block); manic phase in bipolar disorders; severe liver disease; children; 
porphyria. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 461 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

Precautions: cardiac disease (see also Contraindications above); history of 
epilepsy; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the 
elderly (reduce dose); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); thyroid disease; 
phaeochromocytoma; history of mania or psychoses (may aggravate 
psychotic symptoms); angle-closure glaucoma, history of urinary retention; 
concurrent electroconvulsive therapy; avoid abrupt withdrawal; anaesthesia 
(increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension); interactions: Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  

Depression, by mouth, ADULT, initially 75 mg daily (30–75 mg, daily in the 
elderly and adolescents) in divided doses or as a single dose at bedtime, 
increased gradually to 150–200 mg daily as necessary; CHILD under 16 years, 
not recommended. 

Adverse effects: sedation, dry mouth, blurred vision (disturbance of 
accommodation, increased intraocular pressure), constipation, nausea, 
difficulty in micturition; cardiovascular adverse effects particularly with high 
dosage including ECG changes, arrhythmias, postural hypotension, 
tachycardia, syncope; sweating, tremor, rash and hypersensitivity reactions 
(urticaria, photosensitivity); behavioural disturbances; hypomania or mania, 
confusion or delirium (particularly in the elderly), headache, interference 
with sexual function, blood sugar changes; increased appetite and weight 
gain (occasional weight loss); endocrine adverse effects such as testicular 
enlargement, gynaecomastia and galactorrhoea; convulsions, movement 
disorders and dyskinesias, dysarthria, paraesthesia, taste disturbances, 
tinnitus, fever, agranulocytosis, leukopenia, eosinophilia, purpura, 
thrombocytopenia, hyponatraemia (may be due to inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion); abnormal liver function test; in overdose excitement, 
restlessness, and marked anticholinergic effects (severe symptoms include 
unconsciousness, convulsions, myoclonus, hyperreflexia, hypotension, 
acidosis, and respiratory and cardiac depression with arrhythmias; high rate 
of fatality; see also introductory note above), 

Fluoxetine 
Capsule or tablet: 20 mg (present as hydrochloride). 

Uses: moderate to severe major depression. 
Contraindications: manic phase. 
Precautions: epilepsy; cardiac disease, bleeding disorders, diabetes mellitus; 
susceptibility to angle-closure glaucoma; history of mania (discontinue if 
patient entering manic phase); concurrent electroconvulsive therapy 

462 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

(prolonged seizures reported); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); avoid abrupt withdrawal; 
children and adolescents (increased risk of suicide); interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example operating 
machinery or driving. 
Dose:  
Depression, by mouth, ADULT, initially 20 mg once daily, increased as necessary 
after 3 weeks to a maximum of 80 mg daily (60 mg daily in the elderly); 
usual maintenance dose in the range, 20–60 mg once daily (20–40 mg once 
daily in the elderly). 

NOTE. Consider the long duration of action of fluoxetine when adjusting dosage. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances, anorexia with weight loss, 
postural hypotension, pharyngitis, dyspnoea, headache, sleep disturbances, 
dizziness, ataxia, tremor, convulsions (consider discontinuation); altered 
blood glucose control in people with diabetes; taste disturbances, urinary 
retention and frequency, sexual dysfunction, galactorrhoea, arthralgia, 
myalgia, visual disturbances, photosensitivity, chills, increased sweating, dry 
mouth, alopecia, rash (may be sign of serious systemic reaction; consider 
discontinuation), urticaria, angioedema, vasculitis, anaphylaxis; yawning, 
idiosyncratic hepatitis, pulmonary fibrosis, restlessness, akathisia, 
hallucinations, manic reactions, confusion, agitation, anxiety, 
depersonalization, panic attacks, suicidal ideation, hyponatraemia, 
movement disorders and dyskinesias, bleeding disorders including 
ecchymosis; serotonin syndrome, and erythema multiforme (leading to 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis) also reported; on 
withdrawal dizziness, nausea, anxiety, headaches, paraesthesia, sleep 
disturbances, fatigue, agitation, tremor, and sweating (particularly if 
withdrawn too abruptly). 

24.2.2  Medicines used in bipolar disorders 

Treatment of bipolar disorders has to take account of 3 stages: treatment of 
the acute episode, treatment during the continuation phase, and prophylaxis to 
prevent further episodes. Lithium is effective in acute mania but symptomatic 
control of the florid symptoms with an antipsychotic (section 24.1) or a 
benzodiazepine is often necessary while waiting for the antimania drug to exert 
its effect. Benzodiazepines may be given during the initial stages until lithium 
becomes effective, but they should not be used for long periods because of the 
risk of dependence. Lithium may be given concurrently with antipsychotics but 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 463 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

treatment with the antipsychotic should be tailed off as lithium begins to exert 
its effect. However, there is a risk of neurotoxicity and increased 
extrapyramidal disorders when lithium and antipsychotics are used 
concurrently (Appendix 1). Alternatively, lithium therapy may be delayed until 
the patient’s mood is stabilized with the antipsychotic. Lithium is the mainstay 
of the treatment of bipolar disorders but its narrow therapeutic range is a 
disadvantage. Valproic acid (sodium valproate) is effective and carbamazepine 
may also be used. 
Treatment of depressive episodes in bipolar disorders mostly involves 
combination treatment, using either lithium or valproic acid together with a 
tricyclic antidepressant (section 24.2.1). Increased adverse effects are a 
problem, which may compromise treatment. 
Lithium prophylaxis should usually only be undertaken with specialist advice 
and the likelihood of recurrence considered. Long-term lithium therapy has 
been associated with thyroid disorders and mild cognitive and memory 
impairment. Patients should continue the treatment for longer than 3–5 years 
only if benefit persists. 
Withdrawal appears to produce high levels of relapse. If lithium is to be 
discontinued, the dose should be reduced gradually over a few weeks and 
patients warned of possible relapses if lithium is discontinued too abruptly. 
Lithium salts have a narrow therapeutic: toxic ratio and should only be 
prescribed if there are facilities for monitoring serum lithium concentrations. 
Doses are adjusted to achieve serum lithium concentrations of  
0.4–1 mmol/litre (aim for the lower end of the range for maintenance therapy 
and in the elderly) based on samples taken 12 hours after a dose. The optimum 
range for each patient should be determined. 
Overdosage, usually associated with serum lithium concentration of over 
1.5 mmol/litre, may be fatal; toxic effects include coarse tremor, ataxia, 
dysarthria, nystagmus, renal impairment, and convulsions. If any of these 
effects occur, treatment should be stopped and serum lithium concentration 
determined. In mild overdosage, large amounts of sodium salts and fluid 
should be given to reverse the toxicity; in severe toxicity, haemodialysis may be 
required. 
For patients who are unresponsive to or intolerant of lithium, carbamazepine 
may be used in the prophylaxis of bipolar disorder particularly in those with 
rapid cycling manic-depressive illness (more than 4 affective episodes per year). 
 
 
 

464 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

Carbamazepine 
Tablet (scored): 100 mg; 200 mg. 

Uses: prophylaxis of bipolar disorder unresponsive to or intolerant of lithium; 
epilepsy, trigeminal neuralgia (section 5). 

Contraindications: atrioventricular conduction abnormalities; history of bone 
marrow depression; porphyria. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); renal impairment (Appendix 4); 
cardiac disease (see also Contraindications above); skin reactions (see also 
Adverse effects below); history of blood disorders (monitor blood counts 
before and during treatment); glaucoma; pregnancy (risk of neural tube 
defects and neonatal bleeding; Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); 
avoid sudden withdrawal; interactions: Appendix 1. 
BLOOD, HEPATIC OR SKIN DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be 
told how to recognize signs of blood, liver, or skin disorders, and advised to seek 
immediate medical attention if symptoms such as fever, sore throat, rash, mouth 
ulcers, bruising, or bleeding develop. Leukopenia which is severe, progressive and 
associated with clinical symptoms requires withdrawal (if necessary under cover of 
suitable alternative). 

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example 
operating machinery or driving. 

Dose:  

Prophylaxis of bipolar disorder, by mouth, ADULT, initially 400 mg daily in 
divided doses increased until symptoms are controlled up to a maximum of 
1.6 g daily; usual maintenance dose in range, 400–600 mg daily. 

Adverse effects: dizziness, drowsiness, headache, ataxia, blurred vision; 
diplopia (may be associated with high plasma concentrations); 
gastrointestinal intolerance including nausea and vomiting, anorexia, 
abdominal pain, dry mouth, diarrhoea, or constipation; commonly, mild 
transient generalized erythematous rash (withdraw if rash worsens or is 
accompanied by other symptoms); leukopenia and other blood disorders 
(including thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and aplastic anaemia); 
cholestatic jaundice, hepatitis, acute renal failure, Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (erythema multiforme), toxic epidermal necrolysis, alopecia, 
thromboembolism, arthralgia, fever, proteinuria, lymph node enlargement, 
arrhythmias, heart block and heart failure, dyskinesias, paraesthesia, 
depression, impotence, male infertility, gynaecomastia, galactorrhoea, 
aggression, activation of psychosis, photosensitivity, pulmonary 
hypersensitivity, hyponatraemia, oedema, and disturbances of bone 
metabolism with osteomalacia also reported; confusion and agitation in the 
elderly. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 465 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

Lithium carbonate 
Capsule or tablet: 300 mg. 

Uses: treatment and prophylaxis of mania; prophylaxis of bipolar disorder and 
recurrent depression. 

Contraindications: renal impairment (Appendix 4); cardiac insufficiency; 
conditions with sodium imbalance such as Addison disease. 

Precautions: measure serum lithium concentration about 4 days after starting 
treatment, then weekly until stabilized, and then at least once every 
3 months; monitor renal function and thyroid function every 6–12 months 
on stabilized regimens (risk of hypothyroidism; see also note on Patient 
advice below); maintain adequate fluid and sodium intake; reduce dose or 
discontinue in diarrhoea, vomiting, and intercurrent infection (especially if 
associated with profuse sweating); psoriasis (risk of exacerbation); 
pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the elderly (reduce 
dose); diuretic treatment, myasthenia gravis; surgery; avoid abrupt 
withdrawal (see also introductory note above); interactions: Appendix 1. 
PATIENT ADVICE. Patients should maintain adequate fluid intake and avoid 
dietary changes which reduce or increase sodium intake. Patients should be advised 
to seek medical attention if symptoms of hypothyroidism (for example, feeling cold, 
lethargy) develop (women are at greater risk). 

NOTE. Different preparations vary widely in bioavailability; a change in the 
preparation used requires the same precautions as initiation of treatment. 

Dose:  
Treatment of mania (general guidelines only; see also note below), by mouth, 

ADULT, 0.6–1.8 g daily (300–900 mg daily in the elderly). 
Prophylaxis of mania, bipolar disorder and recurrent depression (general 
guidelines only; see also note below), by mouth, ADULT, 0.6–1.2 g daily (300–
900 mg daily in the elderly). 

NOTE. Dosage of lithium depends on the preparation chosen since different 
preparations vary widely in bioavailability. Dosage should be adjusted to achieve a 
serum lithium concentration of 0.4–1 mmol/litre (aim for the lower end of the range 
for maintenance therapy and in the elderly) based on samples taken 12 hours after a 
dose; serum concentrations should be measured 4–7 days after starting treatment, then 
every week until dosage has remained unchanged for 4 weeks, and then every 3 months. 

DOSAGE REGIMENS. For dose information for a specific preparation, consult 
manufacturer’s literature. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances, fine tremor, renal impairment 
(particularly impaired urinary concentration and polyuria), polydipsia, 
leukocytosis, weight gain and oedema (may respond to dose reduction); 
hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcaemia reported; signs of intoxication 
include blurred vision, muscle weakness, increasing gastrointestinal 

466 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

disturbances (anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea), increased central nervous 
system disturbances (mild drowsiness and sluggishness, increasing to 
giddiness with ataxia, coarse tremor, lack of co-ordination, and dysarthria) 
and require withdrawal of treatment; goitre, raised antidiuretic hormone 
concentration, hypothyroidism, hypokalaemia, ECG changes, and kidney 
changes also reported; with severe overdosage (serum concentrations above 
2 mmol/litre), hyperreflexia and hyperextension of the limbs, convulsions, 
toxic psychoses, syncope, renal failure, circulatory failure, coma, and 
occasionally death. 

Valproic acid 
Tablet (enteric-coated): 200 mg; 500 mg (sodium valproate). 

Uses: acute mania; epilepsy (section 5). 
Contraindications: active liver disease, family history of severe hepatic 
dysfunction; pancreatitis; porphyria. 

Precautions: hepatic impairment (monitor liver function before and during 
therapy), especially in patients most at risk (those with metabolic disorders, 
degenerative disorders, organic brain disease, or severe seizure disorders 
associated with mental retardation) (Appendix 5); ensure no undue potential 
for bleeding before starting valproic acid, and before major surgery or 
anticoagulant therapy; renal impairment (Appendix 4); pregnancy (risk of 
neural tube defects and neonatal bleeding; Appendix 2); breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3); systemic lupus erythematosus; false-positive urine tests for 
ketones; avoid sudden withdrawal; interactions: Appendix 1. 
BLOOD OR HEPATIC DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how 
to recognize signs of blood or liver disorders, and advised to seek immediate 
medical attention if symptoms including malaise, weakness, anorexia, lethargy, 
oedema, vomiting, abdominal pain, drowsiness, jaundice, or spontaneous bruising or 
bleeding develop. 

PANCREATITIS. Patients or their carers should be told how to recognize signs of 
pancreatitis and advised to seek immediate medical attention if symptoms such as 
abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting develop; discontinue if pancreatitis diagnosed. 

Dose:  

Acute mania, by mouth, ADULT, initially 700 mg daily in divided doses, increased 
as quickly as possible to achieve the optimal response (maximum, 70 mg/kg 
daily but monitor patient closely if dose is greater than 52 mg/kg daily). 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal irritation, nausea, increased appetite and 
weight gain, hyperammonaemia; ataxia, tremor; transient hair loss (regrowth 
may be curly); oedema, thrombocytopenia, inhibition of platelet aggregation; 
impaired hepatic function and rarely fatal hepatic failure (withdraw 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 467 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

treatment immediately if malaise, weakness, lethargy, oedema, abdominal 
pain, vomiting, anorexia, jaundice, or drowsiness develop; see also note on 
Blood or hepatic disorders under Precautions above); sedation and also 
increased alertness reported; behavioural disturbances; rarely pancreatitis 
(measure plasma amylase if acute abdominal pain develops; see also note on 
Pancreatis under Precautions above); extrapyramidal symptoms; blood 
disorders including leukopenia, pancytopenia, red cell hypoplasia, and 
fibrinogen reduction; irregular menstrual periods, amenorrhoea, 
gynaecomastia, hearing loss, Fanconi syndrome, dementia, toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome (erythema multiforme), vasculitis, 
hirsutism, and acne reported. 

24.3 Medicines used in generalized anxiety and 
sleep disorders 

The most widely used anxiolytics and hypnotics are the benzodiazepines. 
Treatment of anxiety should be limited to the lowest effective dose for the 
shortest possible time. The cause of insomnia should be established and 
appropriate treatment for underlying factors instituted before hypnotics are 
considered. Hypnotics may be of value for a few days but rarely longer than a 
week. 
Tolerance and dependence (both physical and psychological) and subsequent 
difficulty in withdrawing the drug may occur after regular use for more than a 
few weeks. Patients with chronic anxiety, alcohol or drug dependence or those 
with personality disorders are more likely to become dependent. Anxiolytics 
and hypnotics such as diazepam should be prescribed in carefully 
individualized dosage regimens, and use should be limited to control of acute 
conditions such as panic attacks and acute anxiety and severe, incapacitating 
insomnia. There is usually no justification for prolonging treatment with 
anxiolytics and hypnotics for more than 1–2 weeks. 
If used for longer periods, withdrawal should be by gradual reduction of the 
dose over a period of weeks or months, as abrupt discontinuation may 
produce confusion, toxic psychosis, convulsions, or a condition resembling 
delirium tremens. The benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome may develop at 
any time up to 3 weeks after stopping a long-acting benzodiazepine and within 
a few hours in the case of a short-acting one. The syndrome is characterized by 
insomnia, anxiety, loss of appetite and body weight, tremor, perspiration, 
tinnitus, and perceptual disturbances. These symptoms may be similar to the 
original complaint and thus may encourage further prescribing. Some 
symptoms may continue for weeks or months after stopping benzodiazepines. 

468 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

Patients should be warned that their ability to drive or operate machinery may 
be impaired and that the effects of alcohol may be enhanced. 

Diazepam 
Tablet (scored): 2 mg; 5 mg. 

Drug subject to international control under the Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances (1971). 

Diazepam is a representative benzodiazepine anxiolytic and hypnotic. Various 
medicines can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: short-term treatment of anxiety and insomnia; status epilepticus, 
recurrent seizures; febrile convulsions, adjunct in acute alcohol withdrawal 
(section 5); premedication (section 1.3). 

Contraindications: respiratory depression; acute pulmonary insufficiency; sleep 
apnoea; severe hepatic impairment; myasthenia gravis. 

Precautions: respiratory disease; muscle weakness; history of alcohol or drug 
abuse, marked personality disorder; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and 
breastfeeding (Appendix 3); elderly or debilitated (reduce dose); hepatic 
impairment (reduce dose but avoid if severe; Appendix 5), renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); avoid prolonged use and abrupt withdrawal; porphyria; 
interactions: Appendix 1. 
SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example 
operating machinery or driving. 

Dose:  
Anxiety, by mouth, ADULT, 2 mg 3 times daily, increased if necessary to 15–
30 mg daily in divided doses (reduced to half the adult dose in the elderly 
and debilitated patients). 

Insomnia, by mouth, ADULT, 5–15 mg at bedtime. 
Adverse effects: drowsiness and lightheadedness the next day; confusion and 
ataxia (especially in the elderly); amnesia; dependence; paradoxical increase 
in aggression; muscle weakness; occasionally headache, vertigo, salivation 
changes, gastrointestinal disturbances, visual disturbances, dysarthria, 
tremor, changes in libido, incontinence, and urinary retention; blood 
disorders and jaundice; skin reactions; raised liver enzymes. 

 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 469 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

24.4 Medicines used for obsessive–compulsive 
disorders and panic attacks 

Obsessive–compulsive disorders can be treated with a combination of 
pharmacological, behavioural and psychological treatments. Antidepressants 
such as clomipramine, which inhibit reuptake of serotonin, have been found to 
be effective.  
Panic attacks may be treated with behavioural or cognitive therapy. If this 
management fails, drug therapy may be tried. Some tricyclic antidepressants 
including clomipramine, or some selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 
can reduce frequency of attacks or prevent them completely. Benzodiazepines 
(section 24.3) may be used in panic attacks resistant to antidepressants. 

Clomipramine 
Capsule: 10 mg; 25 mg (hydrochloride). 

Uses: phobic and obsessional states; panic attacks. 
Contraindications: recent myocardial infarction, arrhythmias (especially heart 
block); manic phase in bipolar disorders; severe liver disease; children; 
porphyria. 

Precautions: cardiac disease (see also Contraindications above); history of 
epilepsy; pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); the 
elderly; hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); thyroid disease; 
phaeochromocytoma; history of mania, and psychoses (may aggravate 
psychotic symptoms); angle-closure glaucoma; history of urinary retention; 
concurrent electroconvulsive therapy; avoid abrupt withdrawal; anaesthesia 
(increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension); interactions: Appendix 1. 
SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example 
operating machinery or driving. 

Dose:  
Phobic and obsessional states, by mouth, ADULT, initially 25 mg daily, usually at 
bedtime (10 mg daily in the elderly) increased over 2 weeks to 100–150 mg 
daily; CHILD, not usually recommended. 

Adverse effects: sedation, dry mouth, blurred vision (disturbance of 
accommodation, increased intraocular pressure), constipation, nausea, 
difficulty in micturition; cardiovascular adverse effects particularly with high 
dosage including ECG changes, arrhythmias, postural hypotension, 
tachycardia, and syncope; sweating, tremor, rash, hypersensitivity reactions 
(urticaria including photosensitivity); behavioural disturbances; hypomania 
or mania, confusion or delirium (particularly in the elderly), headache, 

470 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

interference with sexual function, blood sugar changes; increased appetite 
and weight gain (occasional weight loss); endocrine adverse effects such as 
testicular enlargement, gynaecomastia, and galactorrhoea; convulsions, 
movement disorders and dyskinesias, dysarthria, paraesthesia, taste 
disturbances, tinnitus, fever, agranulocytosis, leukopenia, eosinophilia, 
purpura, thrombocytopenia, hyponatraemia (may be due to inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion); abnormal liver function test, diarrhoea; hair 
loss reported. 

24.5 Medicines used in substance-dependence 
programmes 

The management of opioid dependence requires medical, social, and 
psychological treatment; access to multidisciplinary care is valuable. Treatment 
with opioid substitutes should be initiated under the supervision of an 
appropriately qualified health-care worker as part of an established treatment 
programme. Methadone, an opioid agonist, can be substituted for opioids such 
as diamorphine (heroin), to prevent the onset of withdrawal symptoms; it is 
itself addictive and should only be prescribed for those who are physically 
dependent on opioids. Methadone is administered in a single daily dose; the 
dose is determined by the degree of dependence. 
Buprenorphine [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] is a partial opioid 
agonist and may be used as an alternative to methadone; it should be 
prescribed only for those who are already physically dependent on opioids. It 
can be used as substitution therapy for patients with moderate opioid 
dependence; in patients dependent on high doses of opioids, buprenorphine 
may precipitate withdrawal due to its partial antagonist properties; it is also 
addictive and in these patients the opioid dose should be reduced gradually 
before initiating therapy with buprenorphine. 

Methadone 
Concentrate for oral liquid: 5 mg/ml; 10 mg/ml (hydrochloride). 
Oral liquid: 5 mg/5 ml; 10 mg/5 ml. 

Drug subject to international control under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 
(1961). 

Methadone is a representative opioid agonist for use in opioid dependence. 
Bupremorphine can serve as an alternative. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 471 



24. Psychotherapeutic medicines 

NOTE. The final strength of the methadone mixture to be dispensed to the patient 
should be specified on the prescription. Care is required in prescribing and dispensing 
the correct strength because any confusion could lead to an overdose; this preparation 
should be dispensed only after dilution as appropriate. 

Uses: adjunct in treatment of opioid dependence. 
Contraindications: acute respiratory depression; acute alcoholism; risk of 
paralytic ileus; raised intracranial pressure or head injury (affects pupillary 
responses vital for neurological assessment). 

Precautions: renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); 
risk of toxicity in children and non-dependant adults or if tolerance 
incorrectly assessed in dependent adults; severe withdrawal symptoms on 
abrupt withdrawal; hypothyroidism; convulsive disorders; decreased 
respiratory reserve and acute asthma; hypotension; prostatic hypertrophy; 
pregnancy (Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); overdosage 
(section 4.2), interactions: Appendix 1. 
INCOMPATIBILITY. Syrup preserved with hydroxybenzoate (parabens) esters 
may be incompatible with methadone hydrochloride. 

Dose: Adjunct in treatment of opioid dependence, ADULT, by mouth, initially 
10–40 mg daily, increased by up to 10 mg daily (maximum weekly increase, 
30 mg) until no signs of withdrawal or intoxication; usual maintenance dose 
in range, 60–120 mg daily; CHILD, not recommended (see also under 
Precautions above) 

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, constipation; drowsiness; also dry mouth, 
anorexia, difficulty with micturition, spasm of urinary and biliary tract, 
bradycardia, tachycardia, palpitations, dysphoria, mood changes, decreased 
libido or potency, rash, urticaria, pruritus, sweating, headache, facial 
flushing, vertigo, postural hypotension, hypothermia, hallucinations, 
confusion, and miosis; respiratory depression, hypotension, and muscle 
rigidity (with larger doses). 

472 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

 

 

 

SECTION 25:  
Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

25.1 Antiasthmatics and medicines for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease 474 

25.2 Other medicines acting on the  
respiratory tract 485 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 473 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

25.1 Antiasthmatics and medicines for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease  

Asthma  

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by episodes of 
reversible airways obstruction due to bronchial hyperresponsiveness; 
inflammation may lead to irreversible obstruction in a few patients. A 
classification system for asthma, based on severity before the start of treatment 
and disease progression, is of importance when decisions have to be made 
about its management. Asthma can be divided by its severity into intermittent, 
mild persistent, moderate persistent, and severe persistent. These are useful in 
the management of the disease since therapy has a stepwise approach which 
must be discussed with the patient before commencing therapy. The level of 
therapy is increased as the severity of the asthma increases with stepping-down 
if control is sustained (see tables on treatment options, pages 477-478).   
Medications for asthma can be administered in several different ways, 
including by inhalation, orally or parenterally (by subcutaneous, intramuscular, 
or intravenous injection).  

Inhalation 

The main advantage of delivering drugs directly into the airways via inhalation 
is that high concentrations can be delivered more effectively and rapidly to the 
airways, and systemic adverse effects avoided or minimized.   
It is important that patients receive careful instruction in the use of pressurized 
(aerosol) inhalation (using a metered-dose inhaler) to obtain optimum benefit 
from their medication. Before use, the inhaler should be shaken well. After 
exhaling as completely as possible, the mouthpiece of the inhaler should be 
placed well into the mouth and the lips firmly closed around it. The patient 
should inhale deeply through the mouth while actuating the inhaler. After 
holding the breath for 10 seconds or as long as is comfortable, the mouthpiece 
should be removed and the patient should exhale slowly.   
It is important to check that patients continue to use their inhalers correctly as 
inadequate technique may be mistaken for drug failure. Spacing devices 
provide a space between the inhaler and the mouth. They may be of benefit 
for patients such as the elderly, small children, and asthmatics who find 
inhalers difficult to use, or for those who have difficulty synchronizing their 
breathing with administration of the aerosol. A large-volume spacing device is 
also recommended for inhalation of high doses of corticosteroids to reduce 
oropharyngeal deposition which can cause candidosis. The use of metered-

474 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

dose inhalers with spacers is less expensive and may be as effective as use of 
nebulizers, although drug delivery may be affected by choice of spacing device. 
Breath-actuated devices, including dry powder inhalers, are also available.   
Solutions for nebulization are available for use in acute severe asthma. They 
are administered over a period of 5–10 minutes from a nebulizer, usually 
driven by oxygen in a hospital setting.   

Oral 

The oral route is used when administration by inhalation is not possible. 
Systemic adverse effects occur more frequently when a drug is given orally 
rather than by inhalation. Drugs given by mouth for the treatment of asthma 
include beta2-agonists, corticosteroids, leukotriene-receptor antagonists [not 
included on the 15th WHO Model List], and theophylline [not included on the 
15th WHO Model List].   

Parenteral 

Drugs such as beta2-agonists, corticosteroids, and aminophylline [not included 
on the 15th WHO Model List] may be given by injection in acute severe 
asthma when administration by nebulization is inadequate or inappropriate. If 
the patient is being treated in the community, urgent transfer to hospital 
should be arranged.   

Pregnancy 

Poorly controlled asthma in pregnant women can have an adverse effect on 
the fetus, resulting in perinatal mortality, increased prematurity and low birth 
weight. For this reason, using medications to obtain optimal control of asthma 
during pregnancy is justified. Administration of drugs by inhalation during 
pregnancy has the advantage that plasma drug concentrations are not likely to 
be high enough to have an effect on the fetus. Acute exacerbations should be 
treated aggressively in order to avoid fetal hypoxia; if available, oxygen should 
be given immediately to maintain adequate oxygenation.   

Breastfeeding 

Inhaled drugs, oral prednisolone and oral theophylline can be taken during 
breastfeeding.   

Acute exacerbation of asthma 

Severe asthma can be fatal and must be treated promptly and energetically. 
Acute severe asthma attacks require hospital admission where resuscitation 
facilities are immediately available.   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 475 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

Severe asthma is characterized by persistent dyspnoea (even at rest) that is 
poorly relieved by bronchodilators, exhaustion, a high pulse rate (usually more 
than 120/minute), a high respiratory rate, and a very low peak expiratory flow.   
As asthma becomes more severe, wheezing may be absent. Patients should be 
given oxygen 40–60% (if available) (see also section 1.1). Patients should also 
be given a beta2-agonist, salbutamol or terbutaline [not included on the 15th 
WHO Model List] via a nebulizer, preferably driven by oxygen. In emergencies 
where a nebulizer is not available, salbutamol, 100 micrograms by aerosol 
inhalation can be repeated 10–20 times, preferably using a large-volume 
spacing device. If life-threatening features are present or the response to the 
beta2-agonist is poor, ipratropium bromide can be added to the nebulizer. 
Patients should also be given a corticosteroid; in adults, the recommended 
doses are: prednisolone, 30–60 mg by mouth or hydrocortisone, 200 mg 
(preferably as sodium succinate) intravenously; and for children, prednisolone, 
1–2 mg/kg by mouth (1–4 years, maximum, 20 mg; 5–15 years, maximum, 
40 mg) or hydrocortisone, 100 mg (preferably as sodium succinate) 
intravenously. In case of vomiting, the parenteral route may be preferred for 
the first dose.   
Most patients do not benefit from the addition of intravenous aminophylline 
or a parenteral beta2-agonist; both cause more adverse effects than nebulized 
beta2-agonists. Nevertheless, an occasional patient who has not been taking 
theophylline, may benefit from a slow intravenous infusion of aminophylline. 
The use of epinephrine (adrenaline) in asthma has generally been superseded 
by beta2-selective adrenoceptor agonists.    
Treatment should never be delayed for investigations, patients should never be 
sedated and the possibility of pneumothorax should be considered. Patients 
who deteriorate further despite treatment may need intermittent positive 
pressure ventilation. 

476 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

 
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC ASTHMA: INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN 

UNDER 5 YEARS 
Preferred treatments in bold print 

Steps Long-term preventive (daily medications)  Quick relief 
STEP 1 None needed in the majority of children; Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist 

Intermittent asthmaa in exceptional cases (for example, active as needed for symptoms 

 children who do not exercise to a planned Intensity of treatment will depend 
schedule), regular long-term preventive on severity of attack 
medication may be needed Inhaled beta2-agonist or sodium 

cromoglicate or a leukotriene 
receptor antagonist before 
exercise or exposure to allergen 

STEP 2 Either inhaled corticosteroidb Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonistc 

Mild persistent asthma (beclometasone, 50-200 micrograms twice as needed for symptoms (not to 
daily) or a leukotriene receptor antagonist exceed 3-4 times daily) 
or modified-release theophylline or  
sodium cromoglicate 

STEP 3 Inhaled corticosteroid (beclometasone, Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonistd 

Moderate persistent 400-800 micrograms daily in divided as needed for symptoms (not to 
asthma doses) exceed 3-4 times daily) 

plus if needed  
either 
Long-acting bronchodilators (modified-
release theophylline) or a leukotriene 
receptor antagonist or long-acting oral 
beta2-agonist 
or 
High-dose inhaled corticosteroid 

(beclometasone, over 800 micrograms 
daily in divided doses) 

STEP 4 High-dose inhaled corticosteroid Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonistf 

Severe persistent asthma (beclometasone, over 800 micrograms as needed for symptoms (not to 
daily in divided doses) exceed 3-4 times daily) 
plus   
Long-acting inhaled beta2-agonist twice 
daily 
plus if needed 

Modified-release theophyllinee or a 

leukotriene receptor antagoniste or long-

acting oral beta2-agoniste or oral 
corticosteroid in the lowest dose possible, 
best given as a single morning dose (use 
soluble tablets if necessary for younger 
children) 

a  Patients with intermittent asthma but severe exacerbations should be treated as having moderate persistent 
asthma 

b  Alternative to inhaled corticosteroids less effective 
c  Alternatives to short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist are inhaled ipratropium, short-acting oral beta2-agonist and 

short-acting theophylline; these alternatives have slower onset of action or higher risk of side-effects  
d  Alternatives to short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist are inhaled ipratropium, short-acting oral beta2-agonist and 

short-acting theophylline; these alternatives have slower onset of action or higher risk of side-effects  
e  Also can be used as alternative to  long-acting inhaled beta2-agonist if necessary (although long-acting inhaled 

beta2-agonist is preferred) 
f  Alternatives to short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist are inhaled ipratropium, short-acting oral beta2-agonist and 

short-acting theophylline; these alternatives have slower onset of action or higher risk of side-effects  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 477 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

TREATMENT OF CHRONIC ASTHMA: ADULTS AND CHILDREN 
OVER 5 YEARS 

Preferred treatments in bold print 
Steps Long-term preventive (daily medications)  Quick relief 

STEP 1 None needed. Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist 

Intermittent asthmaa as needed for symptoms 

 Intensity of treatment will depend 
on severity of attack 

Inhaled beta2-agonist or sodium 
cromoglicate or a leukotriene 
receptor antagonist before 
exercise or exposure to allergen 

STEP 2 Either inhaled corticosteroidb Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonistc 

Mild persistent asthma (beclometasone, 100-250 micrograms twice as needed for symptoms (not to 
daily) or sodium cromoglicate or modified- exceed 3-4 times daily) 
release theophylline or a leukotriene  
receptor antagonist 
 
 
 

STEP 3 Inhaled corticosteroid (beclometasone, Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonistd 

Moderate persistent 100-500 micrograms twice daily) as needed for symptoms (not to 
asthma plus if needed exceed 3-4 times daily) 

either  
Long-acting bronchodilators (long-acting 
inhaled beta2-agonist or modified-release 
theophylline) or a leukotriene receptor 
antagonist or long-acting oral beta2-agonist 
or 
High-dose inhaled corticosteroid 

(beclometasone, over 1 mg daily in 
divided doses) 

STEP 4 High-dose inhaled corticosteroid Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonistf 

Severe persistent asthma (beclometasone, over 1 mg daily in as needed for symptoms (not to 
divided doses) exceed 3-4 times daily) 
plus   
Long-acting inhaled beta2-agonist twice 
daily 
plus if needed 

Modified-release theophyllinee or a 

leukotriene receptor antagoniste or long-

acting oral beta2-agoniste or oral 
corticosteroid in the lowest dose possible, 
best given as a single morning dose (use 
soluble tablets if necessary for younger 
children) 
 

a   Patients with intermittent asthma but severe exacerbations should be treated as having moderate persistent 
asthma 

b   Alternative to inhaled corticosteroids less effective 
c  Alternatives to short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist are inhaled ipratropium, short-acting oral beta2-agonist and 

short-acting theophylline; these alternatives have slower onset of action or higher risk of side-effects  
d  Alternatives to short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist are inhaled ipratropium, short-acting oral beta2-agonist and 

short-acting theophylline; these alternatives have slower onset of action or higher risk of side-effects  
e  Also can be used as alternative to long-acting inhaled beta2-agonist if necessary (although long-acting inhaled 

beta2-agonist is preferred) 
f  Alternatives to short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist are inhaled ipratropium, short-acting oral beta2-agonist and 

short-acting theophylline; these alternatives have slower onset of action or higher risk of side-effects    

478 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

  

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
Decline in lung function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
chronic bronchitis, or emphysema, is reduced by cessation of smoking. 
Infection can complicate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and may be 
prevented by vaccination, for example, with the influenza vaccine 
(section 19.3).   
A limited trial of a high-dose inhaled corticosteroid or an oral corticosteroid is 
recommended for patients with moderate airflow obstruction to ensure that 
asthma has not been overlooked. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease may 
be helped by an inhaled short-acting beta2-agonist or an anticholinergic 
(antimuscarinic) bronchodilator (ipratropium bromide), used as required; when 
the airways obstruction is more severe, regular ipratropium bromide should be 
added. A long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist, for example, salmeterol [not 
included on the 15th WHO Model List] is added in those who remain 
symptomatic or have 2 or more exacerbations in a year; if these measures fail 
to improve symptoms, theophylline can be tried.   
Moderate to severe disease may be treated with an inhaled corticosteroid and a 
long-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonist; if no benefit is seen after 4 weeks, 
treatment should be discontinued. Exacerbations of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease are treated with nebulized bronchodilators and 
oxygen(section 1.1) if necessary; a short course of an oral corticosteroid should 
be given for increased breathlessness. Infection requires antibacterial treatment.    
Long-term oxygen therapy prolongs survival in patients with severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and hypoxaemia.   

Beta2-adrenoceptor agonists (beta2-adrenoceptor 
stimulants)   

The adrenoreceptors in the bronchi are mainly of the beta2 type, and their 
stimulation causes bronchial muscles to relax. The beta2-adrenoceptor agonists  
(stimulants) include salbutamol, terbutaline, and fenoterol.   
When salbutamol is given by inhalation, at doses in the range of 100–
200 micrograms, the effect can last as long as 4 hours thus making it suitable 
for both the treatment (see tables on treatement of chronic asthma) and 
prevention of asthma. Salbutamol can also be taken orally in a dose of 2–4 mg 
up to 4 times daily but is less effective and causes more adverse effects. It can 
also be given by injection for severe bronchospasm.   

WHO Model Formulary 2008 479 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

Adverse effects 

Cardiovascular adverse effects (arrhythmias, palpitations, and tachycardia) may 
occur with salbutamol, but are generally infrequent with inhaled preparations. 
Hypokalaemia may also result from beta2-adrenoceptor agonist therapy. 
Particular caution is required in severe asthma because this effect may be 
potentiated by concomitant treatment with xanthines (for example, 
theophylline), corticosteroids, or diuretics and by hypoxia. Plasma potassium 
concentrations should be monitored in severe asthma.   

Xanthines 
Xanthines include theophylline and aminophylline; they relax bronchial 
smooth muscle (relieving bronchospasm) and also stimulate respiration. 
Theophylline has a narrow margin between therapeutic and toxic effects. At 
therapeutic doses some patients experience nausea and diarrhoea and when 
plasma concentrations exceed the recommended range of 10–20 mg/litre  
(55–110 micromol/litre) arrhythmias and convulsions, which may be fatal, can 
occur. Monitoring of plasma concentrations is therefore recommended. 
Theophylline is sometimes used to treat asthma and stable chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.   
Theophylline is given by injection as aminophylline (a mixture of theophylline 
and ethylenediamine) which is 20 times more soluble in water than 
theophylline alone. It is used rarely by slow intravenous injection for the 
management of severe asthma attacks.   

Corticosteroids 

Inhaled corticosteroids 

Inhaled corticosteroids, such as beclometasone, are the most effective anti-
inflammatory medications for the treatment of asthma. They are 
recommended for the long-term control of asthma in patients using a beta2-
adrenoceptor agonist more than once a week over a 3-month period and some 
episodes affect sleep and activity. Regular use of inhaled corticosteroids 
reduces the risk of exacerbations of asthma.   
Corticosteroids must be used regularly to obtain maximum benefit. Symptom 
control is usually effective after 3–7 days treatment. Long-term high-dose 
regimens of inhaled corticosteroids are preferred for the treatment of severe 
persistent asthma because they reduce the need for the long-term use of oral 
corticosteroids and also have fewer systemic adverse effects.   
Local adverse effects from inhaled corticosteroids include oropharyngeal 
candidosis, dysphonia, and occasional coughing from upper airway irritation. 
The use of spacing devices reduces oropharyngeal deposition and thus reduces 

480 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

the incidence of candidosis; rinsing the mouth with water or brushing teeth 
after using an inhaled corticosteroid may also be helpful. Coughing may be 
reduced by the use of a beta2-agonist before using a corticosteroid inhaler. The 
risk for systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroids is small and is dependent 
upon the dose and potency of the corticosteroid, as well as its bioavailability 
and the plasma half-life of its systemically absorbed fraction. Systemic effects 
are rare and include skin thinning and easy bruising, a small increased risk of 
glaucoma and cataracts, adrenal suppression, decrease of bone metabolism and 
growth retardation in children (see also section 18.1).   

Systemic corticosteroids 
Oral corticosteroids (sections 3 and 18.1) may be used as “maximum therapy” 
to achieve control of a patient’s asthma. This may be useful either when 
initiating long-term therapy for a patient with uncontrolled asthma or as a 
short “rescue” course at any stage for acute exacerbation.   
Long-term oral corticosteroid therapy may be required to control severe 
persistent asthma, but its use is limited by the risk of significant adverse effects. 
In these cases, high-dose inhaled corticosteroids should be continued so that 
oral requirements are reduced to a minimum. Oral doses should be given as a 
single dose in the morning to reduce the disturbance to the circadian cortisol 
secretion. Dosage should always be adjusted to the lowest dose which controls 
symptoms.   

Sodium cromoglicate 
Sodium cromoglicate [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] may be 
helpful in asthma with an allergic basis, but it is difficult to predict who might 
benefit. In adults, prophylaxis with sodium cromoglicate is generally less 
effective than prophylaxis with inhaled corticosteroids. Sodium cromoglicate is 
of value in the prevention of exercise-induced asthma, a single dose being 
inhaled 30 minutes beforehand; however, exercise-induced asthma may 
indicate poor disease control and should prompt assessment of the patient. 
Sodium cromoglicate is of no value for the treatment of acute attacks of 
asthma.   

Anticholinergic (antimuscarinic) bronchodilators   
Ipratropium bromide can provide short-term relief in chronic asthma, but 
short-acting beta2-agonists work more quickly and are usually preferred; 
ipratropium bromide is also added to standard treatment regimens where 
asthma is life-threatening or when an acute attack does not respond to 
standard therapy. Ipratropium bromide is also used as a bronchodilator in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.   
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 481 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

Leukotriene receptor antagonists   
The leukotriene receptor antagonists [not included on the 15th WHO Model 
List], including montelukast, pranlukast, and zafirlukast, block the effects of 
cysteinyl leukotrienes in the airways. They are effective in asthma when used 
alone or with an inhaled corticosteroid; they may be of benefit in exercise-
induced asthma and in those with concomitant rhinitis but are less effective in 
those with severe asthma who are also receiving high doses of other drugs. 
Very rarely Churg-Strauss syndrome has occurred in association with the use 
of leukotriene receptor antagonists; this reaction has often followed the 
reduction or withdrawal of oral corticosteroid therapy. Prescribers and patients 
should be alert to the development of eosinophilia, vasculitic rash, worsening 
pulmonary symptoms, cardiac complications, or peripheral neuropathy. 

Beclometasone 
Inhalation (aerosol): 50 micrograms per dose (dipropionate); 250 micrograms 
(dipropionate) per dose. 

Beclometasone dipropionate is a representative corticosteroid. Various medicines can 
serve as alternatives. 

Uses: chronic asthma not controlled by short-acting beta2-adrenoceptor 
agonists. 

Precautions: see note above; active or quiescent tuberculosis; systemic therapy 
may be required during periods of stress or when airway obstruction or 
mucus prevent drug access to smaller airways; not for relief of acute 
symptoms; monitor height of children receiving prolonged treatment; if 
growth is slowed, review therapy; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Chronic asthma, by aerosol inhalation (standard-dose inhaler), ADULT, 
200 micrograms twice daily or 100 micrograms 3–4 times daily (in more 
severe cases, initially 600–800 micrograms daily); CHILD,  
50–100 micrograms 2–4 times daily or 100–200 micrograms twice daily. 

Chronic asthma, by aerosol inhalation (high-dose inhaler), ADULT, 
500 micrograms twice daily or 250 micrograms 4 times daily; if necessary 
may be increased to 500 micrograms 4 times daily; CHILD, not 
recommended. 

Adverse effects: oropharyngeal candidosis, cough, and dysphonia (usually only 
with high doses); adrenal suppression, growth retardation in children and 
adolescents, impaired bone metabolism, glaucoma, and cataract (with high 
doses, but less frequent than with systemic corticosteroids); paradoxical 
bronchospasm (requires discontinuation and alternative therapy but if mild, 
may be prevented by inhalation of beta2-adrenoceptor agonist or by transfer 

482 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

from aerosol to powder inhalation); rarely urticaria, rash, and angioedema; 
very rarely anxiety, sleep disorders, and behavioural changes. 

CANDIDOSIS. Candidosis can be reduced by the use of a spacing device (see 
introductory note above); rinsing the mouth with water after inhalation may also help 
to prevent candidosis. 

Epinephrine (adrenaline) 
Injection: 1 mg (as hydrochloride or hydrogen tartrate) in 1-ml ampoule. 

See section 3. 

Ipratropium bromide 
Inhalation (aerosol): 20 micrograms/metered dose. 

Uses: chronic asthma; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Precautions: prostatic hypertrophy; glaucoma (standard doses unlikely to be 
harmful but reported with nebulized drug, particularly in association with 
nebulized salbutamol; care needed to protect patient's eyes from drug 
powder or nebulized drug); medical supervision necessary for first dose of 
nebulized solution (risk of paradoxical bronchospasm). 

Dose:  
Chronic asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, by aerosol inhalation, 

ADULT, 20–40 micrograms, 3–4 times daily; CHILD up to 6 years, 
20 micrograms 3 times daily; CHILD 6–12 years, 20–40 micrograms 3 times 
daily. 

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, by inhalation of nebulized solution, ADULT, 
250–500 micrograms 3–4 times daily. 

Adjunct in acute bronchospasm, by inhalation of nebulized solution, ADULT, 
500 micrograms repeated as required; CHILD up to 6 years, 125–
250 micrograms; maximum, 1 mg daily; CHILD 6–12 years, 250 micrograms; 
maximum, 1 mg daily. 

Adverse effects: occasionally dry mouth; rarely urinary retention and 
constipation; tachycardia and atrial fibrillation also reported. 

 
 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 483 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

Salbutamol 
Inhalation (aerosol): 100 micrograms (as sulfate) per dose.  
Injection: 50 micrograms (as sulfate)/ml in 5-ml ampoule. 
Oral liquid: 2 mg/5 ml. 
Respirator solution for use in nebulizers: 5 mg (as sulfate)/ml.  
Tablet: 2 mg; 4 mg (as sulfate). 

Salbutamol is a representative beta2-adrenoceptor agonist. Various drugs can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: prophylaxis and treatment of asthma. 
Precautions: hyperthyroidism, myocardial insufficiency, arrhythmias, 
susceptibility to QT-interval prolongation, hypertension; pregnancy (high 
doses should be given by inhalation because parenteral use can affect the 
myometrium and possibly cause cardiac problems; see also introductory 
note above and Appendix 2); breastfeeding (Appendix 3); diabetes mellitus, 
especially intravenous administration (ketoacidosis reported; monitor blood 
glucose); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Chronic asthma (when inhalation is ineffective), by mouth, ADULT, 2–4 mg,  
3–4 times daily; in some patients up to a maximum of 8 mg 3–4 times daily; 
CHILD under 2 years, 100 micrograms/kg 4 times daily; CHILD 2–6 years,  
1–2 mg 3–4 times daily; CHILD 6–12 years, 2 mg 3–4 times daily. 

Severe acute bronchospasm, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 250 micrograms, 
repeated if necessary. 

Relief of acute bronchospasm, by aerosol inhalation, ADULT, 100–200 micrograms 
(1–2 puffs); CHILD, 100 micrograms (1 puff) increased to 200 micrograms 
(2 puffs) if necessary; by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, ADULT, 
500 micrograms repeated every 4 hours if necessary. 

Prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm, by aerosol inhalation, ADULT, 
200 micrograms (2 puffs); CHILD, 100 micrograms (1 puff) increased to 
200 micrograms (2 puffs) if required. 

Chronic asthma (as adjunct in stepped treatment), by aerosol inhalation, ADULT, 
100–200 micrograms (1–2 puffs) up to 3–4 times daily; CHILD, 
100 micrograms (1 puff) 3–4 times daily, increased to 200 micrograms 
(2 puffs) 3–4 times daily if necessary. 

Severe acute asthma, chronic bronchospasm (unresponsive to conventional 
treatment), by inhalation of nebulized solution, ADULT and CHILD over 18 
months, 2.5 mg repeated up to 4 times daily; may be increased to 5 mg if 
necessary (medical assessment should be considered since alternative 
therapy may be indicated); CHILD under 18 months, clinical efficacy 
uncertain (transient hypoxaemia may occur—consider oxygen 
supplementation). 

484 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



25. Medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

Adverse effects: hypokalaemia after high doses (see introductory note above); 
arrhythmias, tachycardia, palpitations, fine tremor (usually hands), muscle 
cramps, headache, insomnia, behavioural disturbances in children; 
paradoxical bronchospasm, urticaria, and angioedema also reported; slight 
pain on intramuscular injection. 

25.2 Other medicines acting on the respiratory tract 

Caffeine citrate 
Injection: 20 mg/ml (equivalent to 10 mg caffeine base/ml). 
Oral liquid: 20 mg/ml (equivalent to 10 mg caffeine base/ml). 

Caffeine citrate, a respiratory stimulant, is used for neonatal apnoea in preterm infants 
(those born at less than 35 weeks gestastional age and weighing under 2 kg). It is 
preferred over other xanthines such as theophylline (section 25.1), as caffeine citrate 
has a better safety profile and does not require routine medicine level monitoring. 
Other causes of neonatal apnoea should be sought and treated before treatment with 
caffeine citrate is started (e.g. sepsis, hypothermia, hypoglycaemia, hypoxaemia, anaemia, 
seizures).   

Uses: neonatal apnoea in preterm infants.   
Precautions: cardiovascular disorders; renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic 
impairment (Appendix 5).  

Dose: 
NOTE. All doses expressed as caffeine citrate. 

Neonatal apnoea, by mouth or by intravenous injection, NEONATE, 20 mg/kg as a 
loading dose, then 5 mg/kg once daily starting 24 hours after loading dose; 
continue for 4–5 days after cessation of apnoea.   

NOTE. Caffeine citrate, 2 mg = caffeine base, 1 mg.   

Adverse effects: lethargy (physical sign of withdrawal); feeding intolerance; 
irritability, excessive central nervous system stimulation, tachycardia (early 
sign of toxicity), hyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemia; rarely acidosis, 
disseminated intravascular coagulation, haemorrhage, lung oedema, gastritis, 
renal failure, retinopathy of prematurity, and sepsis. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 485 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances 

 

 

 

SECTION 26:  
Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid–base 
disturbances 

26.1 Oral 487 

26.2 Parenteral 488 

26.3 Miscellaneous 493 

486 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid–base disturbances 

26.1 Oral 

Oral rehydration salts 
See Section 17.5.1. 

Potassium chloride 
Powder for solution. 

Compensation for potassium loss is necessary in patients taking digoxin (sections 12.2 
and 12.4) or other antiarrhythmic drugs where potassium depletion may induce 
arrhythmias. It is also necessary in patients with secondary hyperaldosteronism (renal 
artery stenosis, liver cirrhosis, the nephrotic syndrome, severe heart failure) and those 
with excessive loss of potassium in the faeces (chronic diarrhoea associated with 
intestinal malabsorption or laxative abuse).    

Measures to compensate for potassium loss may also be required in the elderly since 
they often consumer inadequate amounts in their diet (exercise caution in renal 
insufficiency; see below). Measures may also be required during long-term 
administration of drugs known to induce potassium loss (for example, corticosteroids 
and thiazide and loop diuretics). However, potassium supplements are seldom required 
with the small doses of diuretics given to treat hypertension. Potassium-sparing 
diuretics (rather than potassium supplements) are recommended for prevention of 
hypokalaemia due to diuretics such as furosemide or the thiazides when these are given 
to eliminate oedema (see section 16).    

For the prevention of hypokalaemia, doses of potassium chloride 2–4 g (approximately 
25–50 mmol) daily by mouth are suitable in most patients consuming a normal diet. 
Smaller doses must be used in renal insufficiency (common in the elderly), otherwise 
there is a danger of hyperkalaemia.    

Larger doses may be required in established potassium depletion, the quantity 
depending on the severity of any continuing potassium loss (monitoring of plasma 
potassium and specialist advice are required).    

Potassium depletion is frequently associated with metabolic alkalosis and chloride 
depletion and these disorders require correction.   

Uses: prevention and treatment of hypokalaemia; electrolyte imbalance 
(section 26.2).   

Contraindications: severe renal impairment; plasma potassium concentration 
above 5 mmol/litre.    

Precautions: the elderly, mild to moderate renal impairment (close monitoring 
required, Appendix 4); history of peptic ulcer; interactions: Appendix 1.  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 487 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances 

IMPORTANT. Extra caution is required when given with drugs liable to raise plasma 
potassium concentrations, such as potassium-sparing diuretics, ACE inhibitors or 
ciclosporin.  
Dose:  
Prevention of hypokalaemia, by mouth, ADULT, 20–50 mmol daily after meals 
(possibly lower doses in the elderly). 

Potassium depletion, by mouth, ADULT, 40–100 mmol daily in divided doses 
after meals; adjust dose according to severity of deficiency and any 
continuing loss of potassium.    

RECONSTITUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s 
directions.   

Adverse effects: nausea and vomiting, gastrointestinal irritation.  

26.2 Parenteral 

Solutions of electrolytes are given intravenously, to meet normal fluid and 
electrolyte requirements or to replenish substantial deficits or continuing losses, 
when the patient is nauseated or vomiting, or is otherwise unable to take 
adequate amounts by mouth. 
The nature and severity of the electrolyte imbalance must be assessed from the 
history and clinical and biochemical examination of each individual. Sodium, 
potassium, chloride, magnesium, phosphate, and water depletion can occur 
singly and in combination, and with or without disturbances of the acid–base 
balance. 
Isotonic solutions may be infused safely into a peripheral vein. More 
concentrated solutions, for example, 20% glucose, are best given through an 
indwelling catheter positioned in a large vein. 
Sodium chloride in isotonic solution provides the most important extracellular 
ions in near physiological concentrations and is indicated in sodium depletion 
which may arise from conditions such as gastroenteritis, diabetic ketoacidosis, 
ileus, and ascites. In a severe deficit, of 4–8 litres, 2–3 litres of isotonic sodium 
chloride may be given over 2–3 hours; thereafter infusion can usually be at a 
slower rate. 
Excessive administration should be avoided; the jugular venous pressure 
should be assessed; the bases of the lungs should be examined for crepitations, 
and in the elderly or seriously ill patients it is often helpful to monitor the right 
atrial (central) venous pressure. 
Chronic hyponatraemia should ideally be managed by fluid restriction. However, if 
sodium chloride is required, the deficit should be corrected slowly to avoid risk 

488 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid–base disturbances 

of osmotic demyelination syndrome; the rise in plasma sodium concentration 
should not exceed 10 mmol/litre in 24 hours. In severe hyponatraemia, 
intravenous infusion of sodium chloride, 1.8% may be used with caution. 
The more physiologically appropriate compound solution of sodium lactate 
can be used instead of isotonic sodium chloride solution during surgery or in 
the initial management of the injured or wounded. 
Sodium chloride and glucose solutions are indicated when there is combined 
water and sodium depletion. A 1:1 mixture of isotonic sodium chloride and 5% 
glucose allows some of the water (free of sodium) to enter the body cells 
which suffer most from dehydration while the sodium salt (with a volume of 
water determined by the normal plasma sodium ion) remains extracellular. 
Combined sodium, potassium, chloride, and water depletion may occur, for 
example, with severe diarrhoea or persistent vomiting; replacement is carried 
out with sodium chloride intravenous infusion, 0.9% and glucose intravenous 
infusion, 5% with potassium as appropriate. 
Glucose solution, 5% is mainly used to replace water deficits and should be given 
alone when there is no significant loss of electrolytes. The average water 
requirement in a healthy adult is 1.5–2.5 litres daily and this is needed to 
balance unavoidable losses of water through the skin and lungs and to provide 
sufficient for urinary excretion. Water depletion (dehydration) tends to occur 
when these losses are not matched by a comparable intake, as for example may 
occur in coma or dysphagia or in the elderly or apathetic who may not drink 
water in sufficient amount on their own initiative. 
Excessive loss of water without loss of electrolytes is uncommon, occurring in 
fevers, hyperthyroidism, and in rare water-losing renal states such as diabetes 
insipidus or hypercalcaemia. The volume of glucose solution needed to replace 
deficits varies with the severity of the disorder, but usually lies within the range 
of 2–6 litres. 
Glucose solutions are also given in regimens with calcium, bicarbonate, and 
insulin for the emergency treatment of hyperkalaemia. They are also given, after 
correction of hyperglycaemia, during treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis, when they 
must be accompanied by continuing insulin infusion (see also section 18.5). 
If glucose or sugar cannot be given orally to treat hypoglycaemia, glucose, 50% 
may be given intravenously into a large vein through a large-gauge needle; this 
concentration is very irritant on extravasation; it is also viscous and therefore 
especially difficult to administer. Larger volumes of less concentrated glucose 
solutions (10% or 20%) can be used as alternatives and are less irritant. 
Sodium hydrogen carbonate (sodium bicarbonate) is used to control severe 
metabolic acidosis (as in renal failure). Since this condition is usually attended by 
sodium depletion, it is reasonable to correct this first by the administration of 
isotonic sodium chloride intravenous infusion, provided the kidneys are not 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 489 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances 

primarily affected and the degree of acidosis is not so severe as to impair renal 
function. In these circumstances, isotonic sodium chloride alone is usually 
effective as it restores the ability of the kidneys to generate bicarbonate. In 
renal acidosis or in severe metabolic acidosis of any origin, for example, blood 
pH < 7.1, sodium hydrogen carbonate, 1.4% may be infused with isotonic 
sodium chloride when the acidosis remains unresponsive to correction of 
anoxia or fluid depletion; a total volume of up to 6 litres (4 litres of sodium 
chloride and 2 litres of sodium hydrogen carbonate) may be necessary in an 
adult. In severe shock, for example due to cardiac arrest, metabolic acidosis 
may develop without sodium depletion; in these circumstances, sodium 
hydrogen carbonate is best given in a small volume of hypertonic solution (for 
example, 50 ml of 8.4% solution intravenously); plasma pH should be 
monitored. Sodium hydrogen carbonate is also used in the emergency 
management of hyperkalaemia. 
Intravenous potassium chloride in sodium chloride solution is the initial 
treatment for the correction of severe hypokalaemia when sufficient potassium 
cannot be taken by mouth. Potassium chloride concentrate may be added to 
sodium chloride solution 0.9% for infusion, thoroughly mixed, and given 
slowly over 2–3 hours under specialist advice and with ECG monitoring in 
difficult cases. Repeated measurements of plasma potassium are necessary to 
determine whether further infusions are required and to avoid the 
development of hyperkalaemia which is especially likely to occur in renal 
impairment. 
Initial intravenous potassium replacement therapy should not involve glucose 
solutions because glucose may cause a further decrease in the plasma-
potassium concentration. 

Glucose 
Injectable solution: 5%; 10% isotonic; 50% hypertonic. 

Uses: fluid replacement without significant electrolyte deficit; treatment of 
hypoglycaemia. 

Precautions: diabetes mellitus (may require additional insulin). 
Dose:  
Fluid replacement, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, determined on the 
basis of clinical and, whenever possible, electrolyte monitoring (see also 
introductory note above). 

Treatment of hypoglycaemia, by intravenous infusion of 50% glucose solution into 
a large vein, ADULT, 25 ml (see also introductory note above). 

490 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid–base disturbances 

Adverse effects: glucose injections, especially if hypertonic, have a low pH and 
may cause venous irritation and thrombophlebitis; fluid and electrolyte 
disturbances; oedema or water intoxication (on prolonged administration or 
rapid infusion of large volumes of isotonic solutions); hyperglycaemia (on 
prolonged administration of hypertonic solutions). 

Glucose with sodium chloride 
Injectable solution: 4% glucose, 0.18% sodium chloride  
(equivalent to Na+30 mmol/l, Cl-30 mmol/l). 

Uses: fluid and electrolyte replacement. 
Precautions: restrict intake in impaired renal function, cardiac failure, 
hypertension, peripheral and pulmonary oedema, and toxaemia during 
pregnancy. 

Dose:  
Fluid replacement, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, determined on the 
basis of clinical and, whenever possible, electrolyte monitoring (see also 
introductory note above). 

Adverse effects: administration of large doses may give rise to oedema. 

Potassium chloride 
Solution: 11.2% in 20-ml ampoule (equivalent to K+ 1.5 mmol/ml,  
Cl- 1.5 mmol/ml). 

Uses: electrolyte imbalance; prevention and treatment of hypokalaemia 
(section 26.1). 

Precautions: for intravenous infusion the concentration of solution should not 
usually exceed 3.2 g (43 mmol)/litre; administer under specialist advice and 
with plasma potassium and ECG monitoring; renal impairment (Appendix 
4); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  

Electrolyte imbalance, by slow intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, depending 
on the deficit or the daily maintenance requirements (see also introductory 
note above). 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. Must be diluted and thoroughly mixed 
before use and administered according to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: cardiac toxicity on rapid infusion. 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 491 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances 

Sodium chloride 
Injectable solution: 0.9% isotonic (equivalent to Na+ 154 mmol/l,  
Cl- 154 mmol/l). 

Uses: electrolyte and fluid replacement. 
Precautions: restrict intake in impaired renal function (Appendix 4), cardiac 
failure, hypertension, peripheral and pulmonary oedema, and toxaemia 
during pregnancy. 

Dose:  
Fluid and electrolyte replacement, by intravenous infusion, ADULT and CHILD, 
determined on the basis of clinical and, whenever possible, electrolyte 
monitoring (see also introductory note above). 

Adverse effects: administration of large doses may give rise to sodium 
accumulation and oedema. 

Sodium hydrogen carbonate 
Injectable solution: 1.4% isotonic (equivalent to Na+ 167 mmol/l, HCO3- 
167 mmol/l). 
Solution: 8.4% in 10-ml ampoule (equivalent to Na+ 1000 mmol/l, HCO3-1000 
mmol/l). 

Uses: metabolic acidosis. 
Contraindications: metabolic or respiratory alkalosis, hypocalcaemia, 
hypochlorhydria. 

Precautions: restrict intake in impaired renal function (Appendix 4), cardiac 
failure, hypertension, peripheral and pulmonary oedema, and toxaemia 
during pregnancy; monitor electrolytes and acid–base status; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Metabolic acidosis, by slow intravenous injection of a strong solution (up to 8.4%) 

or by continuous intravenous infusion of a weaker solution (usually 1.4%), ADULT 
and CHILD, an amount appropriate to the body base deficit (see note above). 

Adverse effects: excessive administration may cause hypokalaemia and 
metabolic alkalosis, especially in renal impairment; large doses may give rise 
to sodium accumulation and oedema. 

 
 
 
 

492 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



26. Solutions correcting water, electrolyte and acid–base disturbances 

Sodium lactate, compound solution 
Injectable solution. 

Compound solution of sodium lactate is a representative intravenous electrolyte 
solution. Various solutions can serve as alternatives. 

Uses: pre- and perioperative fluid and electrolyte replacement; hypovolaemic 
shock. 

Contraindications: metabolic or respiratory alkalosis; hypocalcaemia or 
hypochlorhydria. 

Precautions: restrict intake in impaired renal function (Appendix 4), cardiac 
failure, hypertension, peripheral and pulmonary oedema, and toxaemia 
during pregnancy; interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Fluid and electrolyte replacement or hypovolaemic shock, by intravenous infusion, 

ADULT and CHILD, determined on the basis of clinical and, whenever 
possible, electrolyte monitoring (see also introductory note above). 

Adverse effects: excessive administration may cause metabolic alkalosis; 
administration of large doses may give rise to oedema. 

26.3 Miscellaneous 

Water for injection 
2-ml; 5-ml; 10-ml ampoules. 

Uses: in preparations intended for parenteral administration and in other 
sterile preparations. 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 493 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

 

 

 

SECTION 27:  
Vitamins and minerals 

494 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

Vitamins  
Vitamins are used for the prevention and treatment of specific deficiency 
states or when the diet is known to be inadequate. It has often been suggested, 
but never convincingly proved, that subclinical vitamin deficiencies cause 
much chronic ill-health and liability to infections. This has led to enormous 
consumption of vitamin preparations, which may have no more than placebo 
value. Most vitamins are comparatively non-toxic but prolonged 
administration of high doses of retinol (vitamin A), ergocalciferol (vitamin D2), 
and pyridoxine (vitamin B6) may have severe adverse effects. 
Retinol (vitamin A) is a fat-soluble substance stored in body organs, principally 
the liver. Periodic high-dose supplementation is intended to protect against 
vitamin A deficiency which is associated with ocular defects, particularly 
xerophthalmia (including night blindness which may progress to severe eye 
lesions and blindness), and an increased susceptibility to infections, particularly 
measles and diarrhoea. Universal vitamin A distribution involves the periodic 
administration of supplemental doses to all preschool-age children, with 
priority given to the age group, 6 months–3 years, or regions at greatest risk of 
clinical and subclinical deficiencies. In addition, all mothers in high-risk regions 
should receive a high dose of vitamin A within 8 weeks of delivery. Since 
vitamin A is associated with a teratogenic effect, it should be given in smaller 
doses (no more than 10 000 IU/day) to all women of child-bearing age. 
Vitamin is also used in the treatment of active xerophthalmia. Doses of 
vitamin A should be administered orally immediately upon diagnosis of 
xerophthalmia and thereafter patients with acute corneal lesions should be 
referred to a hospital on an emergency basis. In women of child-bearing age, 
there is a need to balance the possible teratogenic effects of vitamin A should 
they be pregnant with the serious consequences of xerophthalmia. Where there 
are severe signs of xerophthalmia, high-dose treatment (i.e. as for patients over 
1 year) should be given. When less severe symptoms are present (for example, 
night blindness) a much lower dose is recommended. Vitamin A therapy 
should also be given during epidemics of measles to reduce the risk of 
complications.    
Vitamin B is composed of widely differing substances which are, for 
convenience, classed as “vitamin B complex”. Thiamine (vitamin B1) is used 
orally for deficiency due to inadequate dietary intake. Severe deficiency may 
result in beri-beri. Chronic dry beri-beri is characterized by peripheral 
neuropathy, muscle wasting and weakness, and paralysis; wet beri-beri is 
characterized by cardiac failure and oedema. Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 
(demyelination of the central nervous system) may develop in severe deficiency. 
Thiamine is given by intravenous injection in doses of up to 300 mg daily 
(parenteral preparations may contain several B group vitamins) as initial 
treatment in severe deficiency states. As potentially severe allergic reactions 
WHO Model Formulary 2008 495 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

may occur during, or shortly after, parenteral administration, intravenous 
injections should be administered slowly (over 10 minutes) and should be used 
only if parenteral treatment is essential. Facilities for resuscitation should be 
immediately available.  

Riboflavin (vitamin B2) deficiency may result from reduced dietary intake or 
reduced absorption due to liver disease, alcoholism, chronic infection, or 
probenecid therapy. It may also occur in association with other deficiency 
states such as pellagra.  

Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) deficiency is rare as the vitamin is widely distributed in 
foods, but deficiency may occur during isoniazid therapy and is characterized 
by peripheral neuritis. High doses are given in some metabolic disorders, such 
as hyperoxaluria, and it is also used in sideroblastic anaemia. Pyridoxine and 
thiamine also have a role in status epilepticus (see section 5).  
Nicotinic acid inhibits the synthesis of cholesterol and triglyceride and is used 
in some hyperlipidaemias. Nicotinic acid and nicotinamide are used to prevent 
and treat nicotinic acid deficiency (pellagra). Nicotinamide is generally 
preferred as it does not cause vasodilation. Hydroxocobalamin is the form of 
vitamin B12 used to treat vitamin B12 deficiency due to dietary deficiency or 
malabsorption (see section 10.1).    
Folic acid is essential for the synthesis of DNA and certain proteins. 
Deficiency of folic acid or vitamin B12 is associated with megaloblastic anaemia. 
Folic acid should not be used in undiagnosed megaloblastic anaemia unless 
vitamin B12 is administered concurrently, otherwise neuropathy may be 
precipitated (see section 10.1). Supplementation with folic acid, 
400 micrograms daily, is recommended for women of child-bearing potential 
in order to reduce the risk of serious neural tube defects in their offspring (see 
section 10.1).  
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is used for the prevention and treatment of scurvy. 
Claims that ascorbic acid is of value in the treatment of common colds are 
unsubstantiated.    
The term vitamin D covers a range of compounds including ergocalciferol 
(vitamin D2) and colecalciferol (vitamin D3). These 2 compounds are 
equipotent and either can be used to prevent and treat rickets. Simple 
deficiency of vitamin D occurs in those who have an inadequate dietary intake 
or who fail to produce enough colecalciferol (vitamin D3) in their skin from its 
precursor, 7-dehydrocholesterol, in response to exposure to ultraviolet light.  
Children with dark skin must continue vitamin D prophylaxis for up to 
24 months because of their inability to produce enough vitamin D3 in their 
skin. Dark skin, which has a high melanin content, must be exposed to 
daylight longer than light skin in order to obtain the same synthesis of 
vitamin D3. Vitamin D is also used in deficiency states caused by intestinal 

496 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

malabsorption or chronic liver disease and for the hypocalcaemia that is 
associated with hypoparathyroidism.  
Phytomenadione (vitamin K) that is associated with phytomenadione, is 
necessary for the production of blood clotting factors (see section 10.2). 

Minerals 
For the use of iron preparations in the treatment of anaemia see section 10.1.   

Ascorbic acid 
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Also known as vitamin C. 

Uses: prevention and treatment of scurvy. 
Dose: 
Prophylaxis of scurvy, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 25–75 mg daily. 
Treatment of scurvy, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, not less than 250 mg daily in 
divided doses. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances reported with large doses. 

Calcium gluconate 
Injection: 100 mg/ml in 10-ml ampoule. 

Calcium gluconate is a complementary list medicine. 

Calcium supplements, in the form of calcium gluconate, are usually only required where 
dietary calcium intake is inadequate. This dietary requirement varies with age and is 
relatively greater in childhood and during pregnancy and lactation (due to an increased 
demand), and in old age (due to impaired absorption). In osteoporosis, a calcium intake 
which is double the recommended daily amount reduces the rate of bone loss. In 
hypocalcaemic tetany, calcium gluconate must be given parenterally but plasma calcium 
must be monitored. Calcium gluconate is also used in cardiac resuscitation.    

Uses: hypocalcaemic tetany. 
Contraindications: conditions associated with hypercalcaemia and 
hypercalciuria (for example, some forms of malignant disease). 

Precautions: monitor plasma calcium concentration; renal impairment 
(Appendix 4); sarcoidosis; history of nephrolithiasis; interactions: 
Appendix 1. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 497 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

Dose:  
Hypocalcaemic tetany, by slow intravenous injection, ADULT, 1 g (2.2 mmol) 
followed by about 4 g (8.8 mmol) daily by continuous intravenous infusion. 

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions. 

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances; bradycardia, arrhythmia; 
injection-site reactions; peripheral vasodilation; fall in blood pressure. 

Ergocalciferol 
Capsule or tablet: 1.25 mg (50 000 IU). 
Oral liquid: 250 micrograms/ml (10 000 IU/ml). 

Also known as vitamin D2. 

Ergocalciferol is a representative vitamin D compound. Various vitamin D compounds 
can serve as alternatives. 

NOTE. If there is no plain vitamin D tablet available for the treatment of simple 
deficiency, combined calcium and ergocalciferol tablets may be used but the calcium is 
unnecessary. 

Uses: prevention and treatment of simple vitamin D deficiency; treatment of 
vitamin D deficiency caused by malabsorption or chronic liver disease; 
hypocalcaemia associated with hypoparathyroidism. 

Contraindications: hypercalcaemia; metastatic calcification. 
Precautions: ensure correct dose in infants; monitor plasma calcium at weekly 
intervals in patients receiving high doses or those with renal impairment; 
nausea and vomiting may indicate overdose and hypercalcaemia; pregnancy 
(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1. 

Dose:  
Prevention of vitamin D deficiency, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 
10 micrograms (400 IU) daily. 

Treatment of vitamin D deficiency, by mouth, ADULT, 1.25 mg (50 000 IU) daily 
for a limited period; CHILD, 75–125 micrograms (3000–5000 IU) daily. 

Hypocalcaemia associated with hypoparathyroidism, by mouth, ADULT, 2.5 mg 
(100 000 IU) daily; CHILD, up to 1.5 mg (60 000 IU) daily. 

Adverse effects: symptoms of overdosage include anorexia, lassitude, nausea 
and vomiting, diarrhoea, weight loss, polyuria, sweating, headache, thirst, 
vertigo, and raised concentrations of calcium and phosphate in plasma and 
urine; tissue calcification may occur if dose of 1.25 mg continued for several 
months. 

 

498 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

Iodine 
Capsule: 200 mg. 
Iodized oil: 1 ml (480 mg iodine); 0.5 ml (240 mg iodine) in ampoule (oral or 
injectable); 0.57 ml (308 mg iodine) in dispenser bottle. 

NOTE. Iodized oil may also be given by mouth. 

Iodine is among the body’s essential trace elements. The recommended intake of iodine 
for adults is 150 micrograms daily (200 micrograms daily in pregnant and lactating 
women); in children the recommended intake of iodine is 50 micrograms daily for 
infants under 1 year, 90 micrograms daily for children aged 2–6 years, and 
120 micrograms daily for children aged 7–12 years. Deficiency causes endemic goitre 
and results in endemic cretinism (characterized by deaf-mutism, intellectual deficit, 
spasticity, and sometimes hypothyroidism), impaired mental function in children and 
adults and an increased incidence of stillbirths and perinatal and infant mortality. Iodine 
and iodides may suppress neonatal thyroid function and in general iodine compounds 
should be avoided in pregnancy. Where it is essential to prevent neonatal goitre and 
cretinism, iodine should not be withheld from pregnant women. Control of iodine 
deficiency largely depends upon salt iodization (with potassium iodide or potassium 
iodate) and dietary diversification. In areas where iodine deficiency disorders are 
moderate to severe, iodized oil, given either before or at any stage of pregnancy, is 
found to be beneficial.    

Uses: prevention and treatment of iodine deficiency. 
Contraindications: breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 
Precautions: those over 45 years old or with nodular goitre (especially 
susceptible to hyperthyroidism when given iodine supplements; iodized oil 
may not be appropriate); may interfere with thyroid function tests; 
pregnancy (see also introductory note above and Appendix 2). 

Dose:  
Endemic moderate to severe iodine deficiency, by intramuscular injection, ADULT 
woman of child-bearing age (including any stage of pregnancy), 480 mg 
once each year; by mouth, ADULT woman during pregnancy and one year 
postpartum, either 300–480 mg once a year or 100–300 mg every 6 months; 
ADULT woman of child-bearing age, either 400–960 mg once a year or 200–
480 mg every 6 months. 

Iodine deficiency, by intramuscular injection, INFANT up to 1 year, 190 mg; CHILD 
and ADULT, 380 mg (76 mg in those aged over 45 years or with nodular 
goiter; see also under Precautions) (provides up to 3 years protection). 

Iodine deficiency, by mouth, ADULT (except during pregnancy) and CHILD over 
6 years; 400 mg once a year; ADULT woman during pregnancy, single dose 
of 200 mg; INFANT under 1 year, single dose of 100 mg; CHILD 1–5 years, 
200 mg once a year. 

Adverse effects: hypersensitivity reactions; goitre and hypothyroidism; 
hyperthyroidism. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 499 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

Nicotinamide 
Tablet: 50 mg. 

Nicotinamide is a representative vitamin B substance. Various compounds can serve as 
alternatives. 

Uses: treatment of pellagra. 
Dose:  

Treatment of pellagra, by mouth, ADULT, up to 500 mg daily in divided doses. 

Pyridoxine 
Tablet: 25 mg (hydrochloride). 

Also known as Vitamin B6. 

Uses: treatment of pyridoxine deficiency due to metabolic disorders; isoniazid 
neuropathy; sideroblastic anaemia. 

Precautions: interactions: Appendix 1. 
Dose:  
Deficiency states, by mouth, ADULT, 25–50 mg up to 3 times daily. 
Isoniazid neuropathy, prophylaxis, by mouth, ADULT, 10 mg daily. 
Isoniazid neuropathy, treatment, by mouth, ADULT, 50 mg 3 times daily. 
Sideroblastic anaemia, by mouth, ADULT, 100–400 mg daily in divided doses. 
Adverse effects: generally well tolerated, but chronic administration of high 
doses may cause peripheral neuropathies. 

Retinol 
Capsule: 50 000 IU; 100 000 IU; 200 000 IU (as palmitate). 
Oral oily solution: 100 000 IU (as palmitate)/ml in multidose dispenser. 
Tablet (sugar-coated): 10 000 IU (as palmitate). 
Water-miscible injection: 100 000 IU (as palmitate) in 2-ml ampoule. 

Uses: prevention and treatment of vitamin A deficiency; prevention of 
complications of measles. 

Precautions: pregnancy (teratogenic; see also introductory note above and 
Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3). 

Dose:  
Prevention of vitamin A deficiency (universal or targeted distribution 
programmes), by mouth, ADULT, 200 000 IU every 6 months; ADULT 
(pregnant woman), maximum of 10 000 IU daily or maximum 25 000 IU 
weekly; ADULT (woman of child-bearing age), 200 000 IU at delivery or 
within 8 weeks of delivery; INFANT under 6 months, 50 000 IU; INFANT  

500 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

6–12 months, 100 000 IU every 4–6 months, preferably at measles 
vaccination; CHILD over 1 year (preschool), 200 000 IU every 4–6 months.  
NOTE. An additional dose should be given the next day in hospitalized children 
with measles infection. 

Treatment of xerophthalmia, by mouth, INFANT under 6 months, 50 000 IU on 
diagnosis, repeated the next day and again after 2 weeks; INFANT  
6–12 months, 100 000 IU immediately on diagnosis, repeated the next day 
and again after 2 weeks; ADULT (except woman of child-bearing age) and 
CHILD over 1 year, 200 000 IU on diagnosis, repeated the next day and 
again after 2 weeks; ADULT (woman of child-bearing age with severe signs 
of xerophthalmia) as for other adults; ADULT woman of child-bearing age 
with less severe symptoms, for example, night blindness, either 5000–
10 000 IU daily for at least 4 weeks or up to 25 000 IU weekly.    
NOTE. Oral vitamin A preparations are preferred for the prevention and treatment 
of vitamin A deficiency. However, in situations where patients have severe anorexia 
or vomiting or are suffering from malabsorption, a water-miscible injection 
preparation may be administered intramuscularly.  

Adverse effects: no serious or irreversible adverse effects at the recommended 
doses; high intake may cause birth defects; transient increased intracranial 
pressure in adults or a tense and bulging fontanelle in infants (with high 
dosage); massive overdose can cause rough skin, dry hair, enlarged liver, 
raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate, raised serum calcium, and raised 
serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations.  

Riboflavin 
Tablet: 5 mg. 

Also known as Vitamin B2. 

Uses: vitamin B2 deficiency. 
Dose:  
Treatment of vitamin B2 deficiency, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, up to 30 mg 
daily in divided doses. 

Prophylaxis of vitamin B2 deficiency, by mouth, ADULT and CHILD, 1–2 mg daily. 

Sodium fluoride 
In any appropriate topical formulation. 

NOTE. Sodium fluoride may be used in any appropriate topical formulation. 

Availability of adequate fluoride confers significant resistance to dental caries. It is now 
considered that the topical action of fluoride on enamel and plaque is more important 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 501 



27. Vitamins and minerals 

than its systemic effect. Where the fluoride content of drinking water is less than 
700 micrograms/litre, daily administration of sodium fluoride tablets or drops is a 
suitable means of supplementation. Systemic fluoride supplements should not be 
prescribed without reference to the fluoride content of the local water supply; infants 
need not receive fluoride supplements until the age of 6 months at the earliest. 
Dentifrices which incorporate sodium fluoride are a convenient source of fluoride. 
Individuals who are either particularly caries prone or medically compromised may be 
given additional protection in the form of fluoride rinses or fluoride gels. Rinses may be 
used daily or weekly; daily use of a less concentrated rinse is more effective than weekly 
use of a more concentrated one. High-strength gels must be applied on a regular basis 
under professional supervision; extreme caution is necessary to prevent the child from 
swallowing any excess.    

Uses: prevention of dental caries. 
Contraindications: not for use in areas where drinking water is fluoridated or 
where fluoride content is naturally high. 

Dose:  

Prevention of dental caries, as oral rinse, CHILD over 6 years, 10 ml of a 0.05% 
solution daily or 10 ml of a 0.2% solution weekly. 

NOTE. Fluoridated toothpastes are also a convenient source of fluoride for 
prophylaxis of dental caries. 

Adverse effects: in recommended doses toxicity is unlikely; occasionally white 
flecks on teeth at recommended doses; rarely yellowish-brown discoloration 
if recommended doses are exceeded. 

Thiamine 
Tablet: 50 mg (hydrochloride). 

Also known as Vitamin B1. 

Uses: prevention and treatment of vitamin B1 deficiency. 
Precautions: parenteral administration (see note above); breastfeeding 
(Appendix 3). 

Dose:  
Mild chronic thiamine deficiency, by mouth, ADULT, 10–25 mg daily.

502 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Appendix 1: Interactions 

Two or more drugs given at the same time may interact with each other. The 
interaction may be potentiation or antagonism of one drug by another, or 
occasionally some other effect. Drug interactions may be pharmacodynamic or 
pharmacokinetic. 
Pharmacodynamic interactions occur between drugs which have similar or 
antagonistic pharmacological effects or adverse effects. They are usually 
predictable from a knowledge of the pharmacology of the interacting drugs 
and given the fact that an interaction occurring with one drug is likely to occur 
with a related drug. Pharmacodynamic interactions may be due to: 

• competition at receptor sites, 
• drugs acting on the same physiological system. 

Pharmacodynamic interactions occur to some extent in most patients who 
receive the interacting drugs. 
Pharmacokinetic interactions occur when one drug increases or reduces the 
amount of another drug available to produce its pharmacological action. They 
are not easily predicted and an interaction occurring with one drug cannot be 
assumed to occur with a related drug unless their pharmacokinetic properties 
are similar. Pharmacokinetic interactions may be due to: 

• interference with absorption, 
• changes in protein binding, 
• modification of drug metabolism, 
• interference with renal excretion. 

Many pharmacokinetic interactions affect only a small proportion of patients 
taking a combination of interacting drugs. 
Many drug interactions do not have serious consequences and many which are 
potentially harmful occur only in a small proportion of patients. A known 
interaction will not necessarily occur to the same extent in all patients. Drugs 
with a small therapeutic to toxic ratio (such as phenytoin) and drugs which 
require careful dose control (such as anticoagulants, antihypertensives, or 
antidiabetics) are most often involved. 
Patients at increased risk from drug interactions include the elderly and those 
with impaired renal or liver function. 
In the following table the symbol * indicates a potentially hazardous 
interaction and the combined administration of the drugs involved should be 
avoided, or only taken with caution and appropriate monitoring. Interactions 
with no symbol do not usually have serious consequences. 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 503 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Abacavir 
  Methadone Plasma concentration of methadone possibly reduced 
 Phenobarbital Plasma concentration of abacavir possibly reduced 
 Phenytoin Plasma concentration of abacavir possibly reduced 
 Rifampicin Plasma concentration of abacavir possibly reduced 
Acetazolamide 
  Acetylsalicylic acid Increased risk of toxicity when given with high-dose 

acetylsalicylic acid 
 Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Amitriptyline Increased risk of postural hypotension 
 Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Carbamazepine Increased risk of hyponatraemia; acetazolamide increases 

plasma carbamazepine concentration 
 Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Clomipramine Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Increased risk of hypokalaemia; antagonism of diuretic 

effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Digoxin Hypokalaemia caused by acetazolamide increases cardiac 

toxicity of digoxin 
* Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Furosemide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
  Hydrocortisone Increased risk of hypokalaemia; antagonism of diuretic 

effect 
  Ibuprofen Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Lidocaine Hypokalaemia caused by acetazolamide antagonizes action 

of lidocaine (interaction less likely when lidocaine is used 
topically) 

* Lithium Excretion of lithium increased 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Phenobarbital Increased risk of osteomalacia 
  Phenytoin Increased risk of osteomalacia 
  Prednisolone Increased risk of hypokalaemia; antagonism of diuretic 

effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Quinidine Cardiac toxicity of quinidine increased if hypokalaemia 

occurs; acetazolamide possibly reduces excretion of 
quinidine (increased plasma concentration) 

  Salbutamol Increased risk of hypokalaemia with high doses of 
salbutamol 

504 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Acetylsalicylic acid 
  Acetazolamide Increased risk of toxicity when given with high-dose 

acetylsalicylic acid 
  Antacids (Aluminium Excretion of acetylsalicylic acid increased by alkaline urine 

hydroxide; Magnesium 
hydroxide) 

  Dexamethasone Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration; 
dexamethasone reduces plasma salicylate concentration 

  Enalapril Antagonism of hypotensive effect; risk of renal impairment 
when acetylsalicylic acid given in doses of over 300 mg 
daily 

* Fluoxetine Increased risk of bleeding 
* Heparin Enhanced anticoagulant effect of heparin 
  Hydrocortisone Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration; 

hydrocortisone reduces plasma salicylate concentration 
*  Ibuprofen Avoid concomitant use (increased adverse effects); 

antiplatelet effect of acetylsalicylic acid possibly reduced 
*  Methotrexate Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased toxicity) 
  Metoclopramide Enhanced effect of acetylsalicylic acid (increased rate of 

absorption) 
  Mifepristone Manufacturer of mifepristone advises avoid concomitant 

use 
  Phenytoin Enhancement of effect of phenytoin 
  Prednisolone Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration; 

prednisolone reduces plasma salicylate concentration 
  Spironolactone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Valproic acid Enhancement of effect of valproic acid 
* Warfarin Increased risk of bleeding due to antiplatelet effect 
Aciclovir 
  Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
Albendazole 
  Dexamethasone Plasma albendazole concentration possibly increased 
  Praziquantel Increased plasma concentration of active metabolite of 

albendazole 
Alcohol 
  Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Amitriptyline Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Carbamazepine Possibly enhanced CNS adverse effects of carbamazepine 
  Chlorphenamine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced sedative effect 
* Clomipramine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Codeine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
* Cycloserine Increased risk of convulsions 
  Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Fluoxetine Possibly enhanced sedative effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 505 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Fluphenazine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glibenclamide Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Griseofulvin Possibly enhanced effects of alcohol 
  Haloperidol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Insulins Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levamisole Possibility of disulfiram-like reaction 
  Metformin Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; increased risk of lactic 

acidosis 
  Methadone Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Metronidazole Disulfiram-like reaction 
  Morphine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
  Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Phenobarbital Enhanced sedative effect 
   Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration reduced with regular large 

amounts of alcohol 
  Procarbazine Disulfiram-like reaction 
  Promethazine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect; plasma concentration of 

alcohol possibly increased by verapamil 
*  Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect with large amounts of 

alcohol; major changes in alcohol consumption may affect 
anticoagulant control 

Alcuronium 
* Amikacin Enhanced effects of alcuronium 
  Carbamazepine Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (recovery from 

neuromuscular blockade accelerated) 
* Clindamycin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Gentamicin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Halothane Effects of alcuronium enhanced 
  Lithium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Magnesium (parenteral) Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Neostigmine Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
  Nifedipine Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Phenytoin Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (accelerated recovery 

from neuromuscular blockade) 
* Procainamide Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Pyridostigmine Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
* Quinidine Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Streptomycin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Verapamil Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Allopurinol 
  Amoxicillin Increased risk of rash 

506 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Ampicillin Increased risk of rash 
*  Azathioprine Effects of azathioprine enhanced and toxicity increased; 

reduce dose of azathioprine 
 Ciclosporin Plasma ciclosporin concentration possibly increased (risk of 

nephrotoxicity) 
  Didanosine Possibly increased plasma concentration of didanosine 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypersensitivity, especially in renal 

impairment 
*  Mercaptopurine Effects of mercaptopurine enhanced and toxicity increased; 

reduce dose of mercaptopurine 
  Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
Aluminium  hydroxide 
 see Antacids  
Amikacin 
* Alcuronium Enhanced effects of alcuronium 
  Amphotericin B Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Capreomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
* Furosemide Increased risk of ototoxicity 
* Neostigmine Antagonism of effects of neostigmine 
* Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effects of pyridostigmine 
* Suxamethonium Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
  Vancomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Vecuronium Enhanced effects of vecuronium 
Amiloride 
  Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amitriptyline Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Carbamazepine Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
  Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Clomipramine Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of severe 

hyperkalaemia 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrocortisone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Ibuprofen Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect; possibly increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Lithium Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 

concentration and risk of toxicity) 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 507 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Potassium salts Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
  Prednisolone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Amitriptyline 
  Acetazolamide Increased risk of postural hypotension 
* Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amiloride Increased risk of postural hypotension 
*  Artemether + Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

lumefantrine concomitant use 
  Atropine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Biperiden Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
* Carbamazepine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered); accelerated metabolism of amitriptyline (reduced 
plasma concentration; reduced antidepressant effect) 

  Chlorphenamine Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
*  Chlorpromazine Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased 

plasma amitriptyline concentration; possibly increased risk 
of ventricular arrhythmias 

  Codeine Possibly enhanced sedative effect 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of antidepressant effect by estrogens but 

adverse effects of amitriptyline possibly increased due to 
increased plasma concentration of amitriptyline 

   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
*  Epinephrine Increased risk of hypertension and arrhythmias (but local 

anaesthetics which contain epinephrine appear to be safe) 
*  Ethosuximide Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
*  Fluphenazine Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased 

plasma amitriptyline concentration; possibly increased risk 
of ventricular arrhythmias 

  Furosemide Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under tongue owing to dry mouth) 
*  Haloperidol Increased plasma amitriptyline concentration; possibly 

increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Halothane Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of postural hypotension 
 Isoniazid Increased plasma concentration of isoniazid 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under tongue owing to dry mouth) 
  Ketamine Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
  Levothyroxine Enhanced effects of amitriptyline 
  Lithium Risk of toxicity 
  Methadone Sedative effects possibly increased 
  Morphine Possibly increased sedation 
  Nitrous oxide Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 

508 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

*  Phenobarbital Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
lowered); metabolism of amitriptyline possibly accelerated 
(reduced plasma concentration) 

*  Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
lowered); possibly reduced plasma amitriptyline 
concentration 

* Procainamide Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Promethazine Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
* Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Rifampicin Plasma concentration of amitriptyline possibly reduced 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Spironolactone Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Thiopental Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
* Valproic acid Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
  Verapamil Possibly increased plasma concentration of amitriptyline 
* Warfarin Enhanced or reduced anticoagulant effect 
Amlodipine 
  Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Carbamazepine Probably reduced effect of amlodipine 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Mefloquine Possible increased risk of bradycardia 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Phenobarbital Probably reduced effect of amlodipine 
  Phenytoin Probably reduced effect of amlodipine 
  Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Ritonavir Possibly increased plasma concentration of amlodipine 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 509 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Amodiaquine 
   Chlorpromazine Plasma concentration of chlorpromazine increased 

(consider reducing chlorpromazine dose) 
Amoxicillin 
  Allopurinol Increased risk of rash 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Methotrexate Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
  Warfarin Studies have failed to demonstrate an interaction, but 

common experience in anticoagulant clinics is that INR 
can be altered by a course of amoxicillin 

Amoxicillin + clavulanic acid 
  see Amoxicillin  
Amphotericin B 
  NOTE. Close monitoring required with concomitant administration of nephrotoxic 

drugs or cytotoxics. 
  Amikacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
*  Dexamethasone Increased risk of hypokalaemia (avoid concomitant use 

unless dexamethasone needed to control reactions) 
*  Digoxin Hypokalaemia caused by amphotericin B increases cardiac 

toxicity of digoxin 
  Fluconazole Possible antagonism of effect of amphotericin B 
  Flucytosine Renal excretion of flucytosine decreased and cellular uptake 

increased (flucytosine toxicity possibly increased) 
  Furosemide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
  Gentamicin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
*  Hydrocortisone Increased risk of hypokalaemia (avoid concomitant use 

unless hydrocortisone needed to control reactions) 
  Miconazole Possibly antagonism of effects of amphotericin B 
 Paromomycin Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Pentamidine Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
*  Prednisolone Increased risk of hypokalaemia (avoid concomitant use 

unless prednisolone needed to control reactions) 
  Streptomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Vancomycin Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
Ampicillin 
  Allopurinol Increased risk of rash 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Methotrexate Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
  Warfarin Studies have failed to demonstrate an interaction, but 

common experience in anticoagulant clinics is that INR 
can be altered by a course of ampicillin 

Antacids (Aluminium hydroxide; Magnesium hydroxide) 
   NOTE. Antacids should preferably not be taken at the same time as other drugs since 

they may impair absorption. 
  Acetylsalicylic acid Excretion of acetylsalicylic acid increased by alkaline urine 
  Azithromycin Reduced absorption of azithromycin 
  Chloroquine Reduced absorption of chloroquine 

510 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Chlorpromazine Reduced absorption of chlorpromazine 
  Ciprofloxacin Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
  Digoxin Possibly reduced absorption of digoxin 
  Doxycycline Reduced absorption of doxycycline 
  Enalapril Absorption of enalapril reduced 
  Fluphenazine Reduced absorption of fluphenazine 
  Isoniazid Reduced absorption of isoniazid 
  Levofloxacin Reduced absorption of levofloxacin 
  Ofloxacin Reduced absorption of ofloxacin 
  Penicillamine Reduced absorption of penicillamine 
  Phenytoin Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Quinidine Reduced quinidine excretion in alkaline urine (plasma 

quinidine concentration occasionally increased) 
  Rifampicin Reduced absorption of rifampicin 
Artemether + lumefantrine 
*  Amitriptyline Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Azithromycin Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Chloroquine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Chlorpromazine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Ciprofloxacin Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Clomipramine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Erythromycin Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Fluconazole Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Fluoxetine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Fluphenazine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Grapefruit juice Metabolism of artemether + lumefantrine may be inhibited 

(avoid concomitant use) 
*  Haloperidol Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Indinavir Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Levofloxacin Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Lopinavir Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Mefloquine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Nelfinavir Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Ofloxacin Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 
*  Primaquine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

concomitant use 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 511 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

*  Procainamide Risk of ventricular arrhythmias; manufacturer of artemether 
+ lumefantrine advises avoid concomitant use 

*  Proguanil Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
concomitant use 

*  Pyrimethamine Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
concomitant use 

*  Quinidine Risk of ventricular arrhythmias; manufacturer of artemether 
+ lumefantrine advises avoid concomitant use 

*  Quinine Risk of ventricular arrhythmias; manufacturer of artemether 
+ lumefantrine advises avoid concomitant use 

*  Ritonavir Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
concomitant use 

*  Saquinavir Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
concomitant use 

   Sulfadoxine + Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
  pyrimethamine concomitant use 

Asparaginase 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with asparaginase (impairment of 

immune response) 
Atenolol 
  Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Digoxin Increased risk of AV block and bradycardia 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Epinephrine Severe hypertension 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glibenclamide Atenolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Insulins Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; atenolol may mask warning 

signs of hypoglycaemia such as tremor 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Lidocaine Increased myocardial depression (interaction less likely 

when lidocaine used topically) 
  Mefloquine Increased risk of bradycardia 
  Metformin Atenolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 

512 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

*  Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect; possibly severe hypotension 
and heart failure 

  Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Pilocarpine Increased risk of arrhythmias 
  Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Procainamide Increased myocardial depression 
* Quinidine Increased myocardial depression 
 Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Verapamil Asystole, severe hypotension and heart failure 
Atropine 
   NOTE. Many drugs have antimuscarinic effects; concomitant use of two or more such 

drugs can increase adverse effects such as dry mouth, urine retention, and constipation, 
and can also lead to confusion especially in the elderly. 
 

  Amitriptyline Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Chlorphenamine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
   Chlorpromazine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma chlorpromazine concentration) 
  Clomipramine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Fluphenazine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma fluphenazine concentration) 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Possibly reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate 

tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

  Haloperidol Possibly reduced effects of haloperidol 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Possibly reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate 

tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

  Levodopa Absorption of levodopa possibly reduced 
   Metoclopramide Antagonism of effects of metoclopramide on 

gastrointestinal activity 
  Neostigmine Antagonism of effects of neostigmine 
  Pilocarpine Antagonism of effects of pilocarpine 
 Promethazine Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effects of pyridostigmine 
Azathioprine 
*  Allopurinol Effects of azathioprine enhanced and toxicity increased; 

reduce dose of azathioprine 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
*  Sulfamethoxazole +  Increased risk of haematological toxicity 

  trimethoprim 
  Sulfasalazine Possibly increased risk of leukopenia 
* Trimethoprim Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
*  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with azathioprine (impairment of 

immune response) 
* Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly reduced 
Azithromycin 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of azithromycin 

  hydroxide; Magnesium 
  hydroxide) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 513 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

*  Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
  lumefantrine concomitant use 

*  Ciclosporin Possible inhibition of metabolism of ciclosporin (increased 
plasma concentration) 

   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 
probably small) 

   Digoxin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin (increased risk of 
toxicity) 

   Ritonavir Plasma concentration of azithromycin possibly increased 
*  Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect of warfarin 
BCG vaccine 
 see Vaccine, Live 
Beclometasone 
   Mifepristone Possibly reduced effects of inhaled beclometasone for 3–4 

days 
Benzathine benzylpenicillin 
   see Benzylpenicillin  
Benzylpenicillin 
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Methotrexate Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
Biperiden 
   NOTE. Many drugs have antimuscarinic effects; concomitant use of two or more such 

drugs can increase adverse effects such as dry mouth, urine retention, and constipation, 
and can also lead to confusion especially in the elderly. 
 

   Amitriptyline Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
   Chlorphenamine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
   Chlorpromazine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma chlorpromazine concentration) 
   Clomipramine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
   Fluphenazine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma fluphenazine concentration) 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Possibly reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate 

tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

   Haloperidol Possibly reduced effects of haloperidol 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Possibly reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate 

tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

   Levodopa Absorption of levodopa possibly reduced 
   Metoclopramide Antagonism of effects of metoclopramide on 

gastrointestinal activity 
   Neostigmine Antagonism of effects of neostigmine 
   Pilocarpine Antagonism of effects of pilocarpine 
   Promethazine Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects 
   Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effects of pyridostigmine 
Bleomycin 
*  Cisplatin Increased pulmonary toxicity 
*  Oxygen Serious pulmonary toxicity in patients exposed to 

conventional oxygen concentrations during anaesthesia 
   Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 

514 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with bleomycin (impairment of 
immune response) 

* Vinblastine Increased risk of cardiovascular toxicity 
Bupivacaine  
 Lidocaine Increased myocardial depression (interaction less likely 

when lidocaine used topically) 
 Procainamide Increased myocardial depression 
* Propranolol Increased risk of bupivacaine toxicity 
 Quinidine Increased myocardial depression 
Calcium folinate 
  see Folic acid and Folinic acid 
Calcium gluconate 
  see Calcium salts  
Calcium salts 
  Ciprofloxacin Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
  Dexamethasone Reduced absorption of calcium salts 
  Digoxin Large intravenous doses of calcium salts can precipitate 

arrhythmias 
  Ferrous salts Reduced absorption of oral ferrous salts 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypercalcaemia 
  Hydrocortisone Reduced absorption of calcium salts 
  Levothyroxine Reduced absorption of levothyroxine 
  Prednisolone Reduced absorption of calcium salts 
  Sodium fluoride Reduced absorption of sodium fluoride 
  Zinc sulfate Reduced absorption of zinc sulfate 
Capreomycin 
  Amikacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Gentamicin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Streptomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Vancomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
Carbamazepine 
*  Acetazolamide Increased risk of hyponatraemia; acetazolamide increases 

plasma carbamazepine concentration 
  Alcohol Possibly enhanced CNS adverse effects of carbamazepine 
  Alcuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (recovery from 

neuromuscular blockade accelerated) 
  Amiloride Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
*  Amitriptyline Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered); accelerated metabolism of amitriptyline (reduced 
plasma concentration; reduced antidepressant effect) 

  Amlodipine Probably reduced effect of amlodipine 
  Chloroquine Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
*  Chlorpromazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
*  Ciclosporin Accelerated metabolism of ciclosporin (reduced plasma 

ciclosporin concentration) 
* Clomipramine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered); accelerated metabolism of clomipramine 
(reduced plasma concentration; reduced antidepressant 
effect) 

*  Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 
(reduced contraceptive effect) 

* Dexamethasone Accelerated metabolism of dexamethasone (reduced effect) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 515 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Doxycycline Accelerated metabolism of doxycycline (reduced effect ) 
  Ergocalciferol Ergocalciferol requirements possibly increased 
* Erythromycin Increased plasma carbamazepine concentration 
  Ethosuximide May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of ethosuximide 
possibly reduced 

* Fluoxetine Plasma concentration of carbamazepine increased 
* Fluphenazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
  Furosemide Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
*  Haloperidol Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered); metabolism of haloperidol accelerated (reduced 
plasma concentration) 

  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
* Hydrocortisone Accelerated metabolism of hydrocortisone (reduced effect) 
  Indinavir Possibly reduced plasma indinavir concentration 
*  Isoniazid Increased plasma carbamazepine concentration (also 

isoniazid hepatotoxicity possibly increased) 
*  Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 

contraceptive effect) 
  Levothyroxine Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism) 
  Lithium Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 

concentration 
* Lopinavir Possibly reduced plasma lopinavir concentration 
  Mebendazole Reduced plasma mebendazole concentration (possibly 

increase mebendazole dose in tissue infection) 
*  Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 

apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 
contraception) 

* Mefloquine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
  Methadone Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
  Miconazole Plasma concentration of carbamazepine possibly increased 
  Nelfinavir Possibly reduced plasma nelfinavir concentration 
  Nifedipine Probably reduced effect of nifedipine 
*  Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 

contraceptive effect) 
*  Phenobarbital May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; reduced plasma concentration of 
carbamazepine 

*  Phenytoin May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of phenytoin 
often lowered but may be raised; plasma concentration of 
carbamazepine often lowered 

  Praziquantel Plasma praziquantel concentration reduced 
* Prednisolone Accelerated metabolism of prednisolone (reduced effect) 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Saquinavir Possibly reduced plasma saquinavir concentration 
  Spironolactone Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
   Valproic acid May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; reduced plasma concentration of 
valproic acid; plasma concentration of active metabolite of 
carbamazepine increased 

516 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Vecuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (recovery from 
neuromuscular blockade accelerated) 

* Verapamil Enhanced effect of carbamazepine 
* Warfarin Accelerated metabolism of warfarin (reduced anticoagulant 

effect) 
Cefazolin 
* Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Cefixime 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
*  Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Ceftazidime 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
* Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Ceftriaxone 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
* Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Chlorambucil 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with chlorambucil (impairment 

of immune response) 
Chloramphenicol 
* Ciclosporin Plasma concentration of ciclosporin possibly increased 
* Glibenclamide Enhanced effect of glibenclamide 
  Hydroxocobalamin Response to hydroxocobalamin reduced 
* Phenobarbital Metabolism of chloramphenicol accelerated (reduced 

plasma chloramphenicol concentration) 
*  Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration increased (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
  Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of chloramphenicol (reduced 

plasma chloramphenicol concentration) 
* Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Chloroquine 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of chloroquine 

  hydroxide; Magnesium 
  hydroxide) 

*  Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
  lumefantrine concomitant use 

  Carbamazepine Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
*  Ciclosporin Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration (increased risk 

of toxicity) 
* Digoxin Plasma digoxin concentration possibly increased 
  Ethosuximide Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
* Mefloquine Increased risk of convulsions 
  Neostigmine Chloroquine has potential to increase symptoms of 

myasthenia gravis and thus diminish effect of neostigmine 
  Phenytoin Possible increased risk of convulsions 
  Praziquantel Plasma praziquantel concentration possibly reduced 
  Pyridostigmine Chloroquine has potential to increase symptoms of 

myasthenia gravis and thus diminish effect of 
pyridostigmine 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 517 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Quinine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Valproic acid Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
Chlorphenamine 
  Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amitriptyline Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
  Atropine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Biperiden Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Clomipramine Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
  Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
  Lopinavir Possibly increased plasma concentration of chlorphenamine 
Chlorpromazine 
 Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Amitriptyline Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased 

plasma amitriptyline concentration; possibly increased risk 
of ventricular arrhythmias 

  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amodiaquine Plasma concentration of chlorpromazine increased 

(consider reducing chlorpromazine dose) 
  Antacids (Aluminium Reduced absorption of chlorpromazine 

   hydroxide; Magnesium 
   hydroxide) 

*  Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
  lumefantrine concomitant use 

  Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Atropine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma chlorpromazine concentration) 
   Biperiden Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma chlorpromazine concentration) 
*  Carbamazepine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
*  Clomipramine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased plasma 

clomipramine concentration; possibly increased risk of 
ventricular arrhythmias 

  Codeine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
  Dopamine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ephedrine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
  Epinephrine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
* Ethosuximide Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glibenclamide Possible antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levodopa Antagonism of effects of levodopa 

518 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Lithium Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects and possibility of 
neurotoxicity 

  Methadone Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of 

extrapyramidal effects 
  Metoclopramide Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects 
  Morphine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
  Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Phenobarbital Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
*  Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
* Procainamide Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
* Propranolol Concomitant administration may increase plasma 

concentration of both drugs; enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Valproic acid Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
  Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Cholera vaccine (oral)  
 see Vaccine, Live  
Ciclosporin 
  Aciclovir Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Allopurinol Plasma ciclosporin concentration possibly increased (risk of 

nephrotoxicity) 
* Amikacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Amiloride Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
* Amphotericin B Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Azithromycin Plasma concentration of ciclosporin possibly increased 
*  Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of ciclosporin (reduced plasma 

ciclosporin concentration) 
* Chloramphenicol Plasma concentration of ciclosporin possibly increased 
* Chloroquine Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration (increased risk 

of toxicity) 
* Ciprofloxacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
*  Contraceptives, Oral Plasma ciclosporin concentration increased by progestogens 

and possibly increased by estrogens 
*  Digoxin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
* Doxorubicin Increased risk of neurotoxicity 
* Doxycycline Possibly increased plasma ciclosporin concentration 
* Enalapril Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
* Erythromycin Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration (inhibition of 

metabolism of ciclosporin) 
  Etoposide Possibly increased plasma concentration of etoposide 

(increased risk of toxicity) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 519 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

*  Fluconazole Metabolism of ciclosporin inhibited (increased plasma 
concentration) 

* Gentamicin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Grapefruit juice Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration (risk of toxicity) 
  Griseofulvin Plasma ciclosporin concentration possibly reduced 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly 

hypermagnesaemia 
* Ibuprofen Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Levofloxacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Levonorgestrel Inhibition of ciclosporin metabolism (increased plasma 

ciclosporin concentration) 
*  Medroxyprogesterone Inhibition of ciclosporin metabolism (increased plasma 

ciclosporin concentration) 
* Methotrexate Increased toxicity 
* Metoclopramide Plasma ciclosporin concentration increased 
* Nelfinavir Possibly increased plasma ciclosporin concentration 
   Nifedipine Possibly increased plasma nifedipine concentration 

(increased risk of adverse effects such as gingival 
hyperplasia) 

*  Norethisterone Inhibition of ciclosporin metabolism (increased plasma 
ciclosporin concentration) 

* Ofloxacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Phenobarbital Metabolism of ciclosporin accelerated (reduced effect) 
* Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of ciclosporin (reduced plasma 

ciclosporin concentration) 
* Potassium salts Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
  Prednisolone Increased plasma concentration of prednisolone 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of ciclosporin (reduced plasma 

ciclosporin concentration) 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
*  Saquinavir Plasma concentration of both ciclosporin and saquinavir 

increased 
* Silver sulfadiazine Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; possibly reduced plasma 

concentration of ciclosporin 
* Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
* Spironolactone Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
* Streptomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
*  Sulfadiazine Plasma ciclosporin concentration possibly reduced; 

increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
*  Sulfadoxine + Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 

  pyrimethamine 
*  Sulfamethoxazole +  Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; plasma ciclosporin 

  trimethoprim concentration possibly reduced by intravenous 
trimethoprim 

*  Trimethoprim Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; plasma ciclosporin 
concentration possibly reduced by intravenous 
trimethoprim 

*  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with ciclosporin (impairment of 
immune response) 

*  Vancomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
* Verapamil Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration 

 
 
 

520 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Ciprofloxacin 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

*  Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
  lumefantrine concomitant use 

  Calcium salts Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Dairy products Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
  Ferrous salts Absorption of ciprofloxacin reduced by oral ferrous salts 
  Glibenclamide Possibly enhanced effect of glibenclamide 
* Ibuprofen Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
  Morphine Manufacturer of ciprofloxacin advises avoid premedication 

with morphine (reduced plasma ciprofloxacin 
concentration) when ciprofloxacin used for surgical 
prophylaxis 

   Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration can be increased or 
decreased by ciprofloxacin 

* Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
  Zinc sulfate Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
Cisplatin 
  Acetazolamide Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Amikacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
  Amiloride Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Bleomycin Increased pulmonary toxicity 
  Furosemide Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Gentamicin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Methotrexate Risk of pulmonary toxicity 
 Paromomycin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
  Phenytoin Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Spironolactone Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Streptomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with cisplatin (impairment of 

immune response) 
  Vancomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
Clindamycin 
* Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Neostigmine Antagonism of effects of neostigmine 
  Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effects of pyridostigmine 
* Suxamethonium Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
* Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Clomipramine 
  Acetazolamide Increased risk of postural hypotension 
* Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amiloride Increased risk of postural hypotension 
*  Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

  lumefantrine concomitant use 
  Atropine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Biperiden Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 521 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

* Carbamazepine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
lowered); accelerated metabolism of clomipramine 
(reduced plasma concentration; reduced antidepressant 
effect) 

  Chlorphenamine Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
*  Chlorpromazine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased plasma 

clomipramine concentration; possibly increased risk of 
ventricular arrhythmias 

  Codeine Possibly increased sedation 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of antidepressant effect by estrogens but 

adverse effects of clomipramine possibly increased due to 
increased plasma concentration of clomipramine 

  Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
*  Epinephrine Increased risk of hypertension and arrhythmias (but local 

anaesthetics which contain epinephrine appear to be safe) 
*  Ethosuximide Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
*  Fluphenazine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased plasma 

clomipramine concentration; possibly increased risk of 
ventricular arrhythmias 

  Furosemide Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry mouth) 
*  Haloperidol Increased plasma clomipramine concentration; possibly 

increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Halothane Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry mouth) 
  Ketamine Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
  Levothyroxine Possibly enhanced effects of clomipramine 
  Lithium Risk of toxicity 
  Methadone Sedative effects possibly increased 
  Morphine Possibly increased sedation 
  Nitrous oxide Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
*  Phenobarbital Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered); metabolism of clomipramine possibly 
accelerated (reduced plasma concentration) 

*  Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
lowered); possibly reduced plasma clomipramine 
concentration 

* Procainamide Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Promethazine Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
* Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Rifampicin Plasma concentration of clomipramine possibly reduced 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Spironolactone Increased risk of postural hypotension 
  Thiopental Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
* Valproic acid Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
  Verapamil Possibly increased plasma concentration of clomipramine 
  Warfarin Enhanced or reduced anticoagulant effect 

 
 

522 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Clotrimazole 
* Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
Cloxacillin 
  see Benzylpenicillin  
Codeine 
  Alcohol Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
  Amitriptyline Possibly increased sedation 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
 Clomipramine Possibly increased sedation 
  Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
  Haloperidol Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
  Metoclopramide Antagonism of effect of metoclopramide on gastrointestinal 

activity 
* Ritonavir Ritonavir possibly increases plasma concentration of 

codeine 
Contraceptives, Oral 
   NOTE. Interactions of combined (estrogen and progestogen) oral contraceptives may 

also apply to combined parenteral contraceptives. 
 

  Acetazolamide Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
  Amiloride Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
  Amitriptyline Antagonism of antidepressant effect by estrogens but 

adverse effects of amitriptyline possibly increased due to 
increased plasma concentration of amitriptyline 

  Amlodipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Amoxicillin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Ampicillin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Atenolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Azithromycin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Benzylpenicillin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
*  Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 

(reduced contraceptive effect) 
   Cefixime Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Ceftazidime Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Ceftriaxone Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
*  Ciclosporin Plasma ciclosporin concentration increased by progestogens 

and possibly increased by estrogens 
   Ciprofloxacin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Clomipramine Antagonism of antidepressant effect by estrogens but 

adverse effects of clomipramine possibly increased due to 
increased plasma concentration of clomipramine 

   Dexamethasone Oral contraceptives containing estrogens increase plasma 
concentration of dexamethasone 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 523 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Doxycycline Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 
probably small) 

   Efavirenz Efficacy of estrogen-containing oral contraceptives possibly 
reduced 

  Enalapril Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Erythromycin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Fluconazole Anecdotal reports of failure of estrogen-containing 

contraceptives 
  Furosemide Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
   Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
*  Griseofulvin Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 

(reduced contraceptive effect) 
  Hydralazine Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
  Hydrocortisone Oral contraceptives containing estrogens increase plasma 

concentration of hydrocortisone 
 Imipenem + cilastatin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Levofloxacin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
  Methyldopa Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Metronidazole Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
*  Nelfinavir Accelerated metabolism of estrogens (reduced contraceptive 

effect); nelfinavir possibly reduces contraceptive effect of 
progestogens 

*  Nevirapine Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 
(reduced contraceptive effect) 

  Nifedipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Ofloxacin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
*  Phenobarbital Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 

(reduced contraceptive effect) 
   Phenoxymethylpenicillin Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
*  Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 

(reduced contraceptive effect) 
   Prednisolone Oral contraceptives containing estrogens increase plasma 

concentration of prednisolone 
  Propranolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
*  Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 

(reduced contraceptive effect) 
*  Ritonavir Accelerated metabolism of estrogens (reduced contraceptive 

effect) 
  Sodium nitroprusside Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Spironolactone Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 

524 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Verapamil Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
*  Warfarin Antagonism of anticoagulant effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
Cyclophosphamide 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Suxamethonium Enhanced effect of suxamethonium 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with cyclophosphamide 

(impairment of immune response) 
Cycloserine 
* Alcohol Increased risk of convulsions 
  Isoniazid Increased risk of CNS toxicity 
Cytarabine 
  Flucytosine Plasma flucytosine concentration possibly reduced 
  Phenytoin Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with cytarabine (impairment of 

immune response) 
Dacarbazine 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with dacarbazine (impairment of 

immune response) 
Dactinomycin 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with dactinomycin (impairment 

of immune response) 
Dairy products 
  Ciprofloxacin Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
Dapsone 
  Rifampicin Reduced plasma dapsone concentration 
   Sulfamethoxazole +  Plasma concentration of both dapsone and trimethoprim 

  trimethoprim may increase with concomitant use 
 Trimethoprim Plasma concentration of both dapsone and trimethoprim 

may increase with concomitant use 
Daunorubicin 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with daunorubicin (impairment 

of immune response) 
Dexamethasone 
  Acetazolamide Increased risk of hypokalaemia; antagonism of diuretic 

effect 
  Acetylsalicylic acid Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration; 

dexamethasone reduces plasma salicylate concentration 
  Albendazole Plasma albendazole concentration possibly increased 
  Amiloride Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Amlodipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
*  Amphotericin B Increased risk of hypokalaemia (avoid concomitant use 

unless dexamethasone needed to control reactions) 
  Atenolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Calcium salts Reduced absorption of calcium salts 
* Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of dexamethasone (reduced effect) 
  Contraceptives, Oral Oral contraceptives containing estrogens increase plasma 

concentration of dexamethasone 
  Digoxin Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
  Enalapril Antagonism of hypotensive effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 525 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Ephedrine Metabolism of dexamethasone accelerated 
  Erythromycin Erythromycin possibly inhibits metabolism of 

dexamethasone 
  Furosemide Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
  Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
  Ibuprofen Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration 
  Indinavir Possibly reduced plasma indinavir concentration 
  Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 Isosorbide dinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Lopinavir Possibly reduced plasma lopinavir concentration 
  Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
* Methotrexate Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
  Methyldopa Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Mifepristone Possibly reduced effects of dexamethasone for 3–4 days 
  Nifedipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Phenobarbital Metabolism of dexamethasone accelerated (reduced effect) 
* Phenytoin Metabolism of dexamethasone accelerated (reduced effect) 
  Praziquantel Plasma praziquantel concentration reduced 
  Propranolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of dexamethasone (reduced effect) 
  Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Salbutamol Increased risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of salbutamol 

given with dexamethasone 
  Saquinavir Possibly reduced plasma saquinavir concentration 
  Sodium nitroprusside Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Vaccine, Influenza High doses of dexamethasone impair immune response 
* Vaccine, Live High doses of dexamethasone impair immune response; 

avoid use of live vaccines with dexamethasone 
  Verapamil Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
*  Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced or reduced (high-

dose dexamethasone enhances anticoagulant effect) 
Diazepam 
  Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amitriptyline Enhanced sedative effect 
  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Chlorphenamine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Clomipramine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Codeine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Haloperidol Enhanced sedative effect 
  Halothane Enhanced sedative effect 

526 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Isoniazid Metabolism of diazepam inhibited 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ketamine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Levodopa Possibly antagonism of levodopa effects 
  Methadone Increased sedative effect 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Morphine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Nitrous oxide Enhanced sedative effect 
  Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased or 

decreased by diazepam 
  Promethazine Enhanced sedative effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Rifampicin Metabolism of diazepam accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir (risk of 

extreme sedation and respiratory depression—avoid 
concomitant use) 

  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Thiopental Enhanced sedative effect 
  Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Didanosine 
   NOTE. Antacids present in buffered tablet formulation may affect absorption of other 

drugs; see also Antacids. 
 

  Allopurinol Possibly increased plasma concentration of didanosine 
* Ribavirin Increased risk of adverse effects; manufacturer of ribavirin 

advises avoid concomitant use 
* Stavudine Increased risk of adverse effects 
 Tenofovir Plasma concentration of didanosine increased (increased 

risk of toxicity — avoid concomitant use) 
Digoxin 
*  Acetazolamide Hypokalaemia caused by acetazolamide increases cardiac 

toxicity of digoxin 
* Amphotericin B Hypokalaemia caused by amphotericin B increases cardiac 

toxicity of digoxin 
  Antacids (Aluminium  Possibly reduced absorption of digoxin 

  hydroxide; Magnesium 
  hydroxide) 

  Atenolol Increased risk of AV block and bradycardia 
  Azithromycin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
  Calcium salts Large intravenous doses of calcium salts can precipitate 

arrhythmias 
* Chloroquine Plasma digoxin concentration possibly increased 
* Ciclosporin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
  Dexamethasone Increased risk of hypokalaemia 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 527 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 Erythromycin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin (increased risk of 
toxicity) 

* Furosemide Hypokalaemia caused by furosemide increases cardiac 
toxicity of digoxin 

  Gentamicin Possibly increased plasma concentration of digoxin 
* Hydrochlorothiazide Hypokalaemia caused by hydrochlorothiazide increases 

cardiac toxicity of digoxin 
  Hydrocortisone Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
  Ibuprofen Possibly exacerbation of heart failure, reduced renal 

function, and increased plasma digoxin concentration 
  Mefloquine Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
* Nifedipine Possibly increased plasma concentration of digoxin 
  Penicillamine Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly reduced 
  Phenytoin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly reduced 
  Prednisolone Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
  Propranolol Increased risk of AV block and bradycardia 
* Quinidine Plasma concentration of digoxin increased (halve dose of 

digoxin) 
* Quinine Plasma concentration of digoxin increased 
  Rifampicin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly reduced 
  Salbutamol Possibly reduced plasma concentration of digoxin 
* Spironolactone Plasma concentration of digoxin increased 
  Sulfamethoxazole +  Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly increased 

  trimethoprim 
  Sulfasalazine Absorption of digoxin possibly reduced 
  Suxamethonium Risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
  Timolol Increased AV block and bradycardia 
  Trimethoprim Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly increased 
* Verapamil Increased plasma concentration of digoxin; increased AV 

block and bradycardia 
Dimercaprol 
* Ferrous salts Avoid concomitant use 
Dopamine 
  Chlorpromazine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
  Ergometrine Increased risk of ergotism 
  Fluphenazine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
  Haloperidol Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
Doxorubicin 
  Ciclosporin Increased risk of neurotoxicity 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Stavudine Doxorubicin may inhibit effect of stavudine 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with doxorubicin (impairment of 

immune response) 
Doxycycline 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of doxycycline 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

  Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of doxycycline (reduced effect) 
* Ciclosporin Possibly increased plasma ciclosporin concentration 
  Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
  Ferrous salts Absorption of oral ferrous salts reduced by doxycycline; 

absorption of doxycycline reduced by oral ferrous salts 

528 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Methotrexate Increased risk of methotrexate toxicity 
   Phenobarbital Metabolism of doxycycline accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
   Phenytoin Increased metabolism of doxycycline (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
  Rifampicin Plasma doxycycline concentration possibly reduced 
* Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
Efavirenz 
  Contraceptives, Oral Efficacy of estrogen-containing oral contraceptives possibly 

reduced 
* Ergometrine Increased risk of ergotism (avoid concomitant use) 
  Grapefruit juice Plasma concentration of efavirenz possibly increased 
  Indinavir Efavirenz reduces plasma concentration of indinavir 
* Lopinavir Plasma concentration of lopinavir reduced 
  Methadone Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
  Nevirapine Plasma efavirenz concentration reduced 
  Rifampicin Reduced plasma concentration of efavirenz (increase 

efavirenz dose) 
  Ritonavir Increased risk of toxicity (monitor liver function tests) 
  Saquinavir Efavirenz significantly reduces plasma concentration of 

saquinavir 
Emtricitabine 
 Lamivudine No information available; manufacturer advises avoid 

concomitant use 
Enalapril 
* Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Acetylsalicylic acid Antagonism of hypotensive effect; risk of renal impairment 

when acetylsalicylic acid given in doses of over 300 mg 
daily 

  Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of severe 

hyperkalaemia 
  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Absorption of enalapril reduced 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

  Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Glibenclamide Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Heparin Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 529 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect; increased risk of renal 
impairment 

  Insulins Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Lithium Enalapril reduces excretion of lithium (increased plasma 

lithium concentration) 
   Metformin Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Potassium salts Increased risk of severe hyperkalaemia 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of severe 

hyperkalaemia (monitor plasma potassium concentration 
with low-dose spironolactone in heart failure) 

   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Ephedrine 
   Chlorpromazine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
   Dexamethasone Metabolism of dexamethasone accelerated 
   Fluphenazine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
   Haloperidol Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
   Oxytocin Risk of hypertension due to enhanced vasopressor effect of 

ephedrine 
Epinephrine  
*  Amitriptyline Increased risk of hypertension and arrhythmias (but local 

anaesthetics which contain epinephrine appear to be safe) 
 * Atenolol Severe hypertension 
  Chlorpromazine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
*  Clomipramine Increased risk of hypertension and arrhythmias (but local 

anaesthetics which contain epinephrine appear to be safe) 
  Fluphenazine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
  Haloperidol Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
* Halothane Risk of arrhythmias 
  Oxytocin Risk of hypertension due to enhanced vasopressor effect of 

epinephrine 
* Propranolol Severe hypertension 
* Timolol Severe hypertension 
Ergocalciferol 
  Carbamazepine Ergocalciferol requirements possibly increased 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypercalcaemia 
  Phenobarbital Ergocalciferol requirements possibly increased 
  Phenytoin Ergocalciferol requirements possibly increased 
Ergometrine 
  Dopamine Increased risk of ergotism 
 * Efavirenz Increased risk of ergotism (avoid concomitant use) 
   Halothane Reduced effect of ergometrine on parturient uterus 

 

530 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Erythromycin 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Carbamazepine Increased plasma carbamazepine concentration 
 * Ciclosporin Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration (inhibition of 
  metabolism of ciclosporin) 
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Dexamethasone Erythromycin possibly inhibits metabolism of 

dexamethasone 
   Digoxin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
   Hydrocortisone Erythromycin possibly inhibits metabolism of 

hydrocortisone 
   Prednisolone Erythromycin possibly inhibits metabolism of prednisolone 
 * Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias with parenteral 
  erythromycin 
   Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
   Valproic acid Metabolism of valproic acid possibly inhibited (increased 

plasma concentration) 
 * Verapamil Possible inhibition of metabolism of verapamil (increased 
  risk of toxicity) 
 * Vinblastine Increased toxicity of vinblastine (avoid concomitant use) 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Estradiol cypionate 
 see Contraceptives, Oral 
Ethinylestradiol 
   see Contraceptives, Oral 
Ethosuximide 
 * Amitriptyline Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Carbamazepine May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; possibly reduced plasma concentration 
of ethosuximide 

   Chloroquine Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
 * Chlorpromazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Clomipramine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Fluphenazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Haloperidol Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Isoniazid Metabolism of ethosuximide inhibited (increased plasma 
  ethosuximide concentration and risk of toxicity) 
 * Mefloquine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
   Phenobarbital May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; possibly reduced plasma concentration 
of ethosuximide 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 531 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Phenytoin May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
  antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of phenytoin 

possibly increased; plasma concentration of ethosuximide 
possibly reduced 

   Valproic acid May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
antiepileptic effect; possibly increased plasma 
concentration of ethosuximide 

Etoposide 
   Ciclosporin Possibly increased plasma concentration of etoposide 

(increased risk of toxicity) 
   Phenobarbital Possibly reduced plasma concentration of etoposide 
   Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin and possibly 

reduced plasma concentration of etoposide 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with etoposide (impairment of 

immune response) 
 * Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Ferrous salts 
   Calcium salts Reduced absorption of oral ferrous salts 
   Ciprofloxacin Absorption of ciprofloxacin reduced by oral ferrous salts 
 * Dimercaprol Avoid concomitant use 
   Doxycycline Absorption of oral ferrous salts reduced by doxycycline; 

absorption of doxycycline reduced by oral ferrous salts 
   Levodopa Absorption of levodopa may be reduced by oral ferrous 

salts 
   Levofloxacin Absorption of levofloxacin reduced by oral ferrous salts 
   Levothyroxine Absorption of levothyroxine reduced by oral ferrous salts 

(give at least 2 hours apart) 
   Methyldopa Oral ferrous salts reduce hypotensive effect of methyldopa 
   Ofloxacin Absorption of ofloxacin reduced by oral ferrous salts 
   Penicillamine Oral ferrous salts reduce absorption of penicillamine 
   Zinc sulfate Absorption of zinc and of oral ferrous salts reduced 
Ferrous salt + folic acid 
   see Ferrous salts; Folic acid 
Fluconazole 
   Amphotericin B Possible antagonism of effect of amphotericin B 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Ciclosporin Metabolism of ciclosporin inhibited (increased plasma 
  concentration) 
   Contraceptives, Oral Anecdotal reports of failure of estrogen-containing 

contraceptives 
 * Glibenclamide Plasma concentration of glibenclamide increased 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Plasma concentration of fluconazole increased 
 * Nevirapine Increased plasma concentration of nevirapine 
 * Phenytoin Plasma concentration of phenytoin increased (consider 
  reducing dose of phenytoin) 
 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of fluconazole (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
   Ritonavir Plasma concentration of fluconazole increased by ritonavir 
   Saquinavir Plasma concentration of saquinavir possibly increased 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
 * Zidovudine Increased plasma concentration of zidovudine (increased 
  risk of toxicity) 

532 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Flucytosine 
   Amphotericin B Renal excretion of flucytosine decreased and cellular uptake 

increased (flucytosine toxicity possibly increased) 
   Cytarabine Plasma flucytosine concentration possibly reduced 
Fluorouracil 
   Metronidazole Metabolism of fluorouracil inhibited (increased toxicity) 
   Phenytoin Metabolism of phenytoin possibly inhibited (increased risk 

of toxicity) 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with fluorouracil (impairment of 

immune response) 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
Fluoxetine 
 * Acetylsalicylic acid Increased risk of bleeding 
 Alcohol Possibly increased sedation 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Carbamazepine Plasma concentration of carbamazepine increased 
 * Haloperidol Plasma concentration of haloperidol increased 
 * Ibuprofen Increased risk of bleeding 
 * Lithium Increased risk of CNS effects (lithium toxicity reported) 
 Phenobarbital Antagonism of anticonvulsive effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
 * Phenytoin Plasma concentration of phenytoin increased 
 * Ritonavir Plasma concentration of fluoxetine possibly increased 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
Fluphenazine 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Amitriptyline Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased 
  plasma amitriptyline concentration; possibly increased risk 

of ventricular arrhythmias 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of fluphenazine 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atropine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma fluphenazine concentration) 
   Biperiden Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects (but reduced 

plasma fluphenazine concentration) 
 * Carbamazepine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Clomipramine Increased antimuscarinic adverse effects; increased plasma 
  clomipramine concentration; possibly increased risk of 

ventricular arrhythmias 
   Codeine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Dopamine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ephedrine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 533 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Epinephrine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
 * Ethosuximide Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glibenclamide Possible antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Antagonism of effects of levodopa 
   Lithium Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects and possibility of 

neurotoxicity 
   Methadone Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of 

extrapyramidal effects 
   Metoclopramide Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects 
   Morphine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Phenobarbital Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Procainamide Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Valproic acid Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Folic acid; folinic acid 
   Phenobarbital Plasma concentration of phenobarbital possibly reduced 
   Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly reduced 
   Sulfasalazine Possibly reduced absorption of folic acid 
Furosemide 
   Acetazolamide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Amikacin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amphotericin B Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Carbamazepine Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
   Clomipramine Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 

534 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Dexamethasone Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 
hypokalaemia 

   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Digoxin Hypokalaemia caused by furosemide increases cardiac 
  toxicity of digoxin 
 * Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Gentamicin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
  Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Ibuprofen Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Lidocaine Action of lidocaine antagonized by hypokalaemia caused by 
  furosemide (interaction less likely when lidocaine used 

topically) 
 * Lithium Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity); furosemide safer than 

hydrochlorothiazide 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Paromomycin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Quinidine Cardiac toxicity of quinidine increased by hypokalaemia 

caused by furosemide 
 Salbutamol Increased risk of hypokalaemia with high doses of 

salbutamol 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Streptomycin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
 Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Vancomycin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
 Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Gentamicin 
 * Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Amphotericin B Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
   Capreomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
 * Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
   Digoxin Possibly increased plasma concentration of digoxin 
 * Furosemide Increased risk of ototoxicity 
 * Neostigmine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 535 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
 * Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
 Vancomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
 * Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Glibenclamide 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect 
   Atenolol Atenolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
 * Chloramphenicol Enhanced effect of glibenclamide 
   Chlorpromazine Possible antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Ciprofloxacin Possibly enhanced effect of glibenclamide 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Enalapril Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
 * Fluconazole Plasma concentration of glibenclamide increased 
   Fluphenazine Possible antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Furosemide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Ibuprofen Possibly enhanced effect of glibenclamide 
   Levonorgestrel Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Medroxyprogesterone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Norethisterone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Propranolol Propranolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such 

as tremor 
 * Rifampicin Possibly accelerated metabolism (reduced effect) of 
  glibenclamide 
   Silver sulfadiazine Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
   Sulfadiazine Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
   Sulfadoxine +  Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 

  pyrimethamine 
   Sulfamethoxazole +  Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 

  trimethoprim 
   Testosterone Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Timolol Timolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
   Trimethoprim Effects of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
 * Warfarin Possibly enhanced hypoglycaemic effect and changes to 
  anticoagulant effect 
Glyceryl trinitrate 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry mouth) 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atropine Possibly reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate 

tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

536 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Biperiden Possibly reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate 
tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Clomipramine Reduced effect of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry mouth) 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Heparin Anticoagulant effect reduced by infusion of glyceryl 
  trinitrate 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Grapefruit juice 
   Artemether +  Metabolism of artemether and lumefantrine may be 

  lumefantrine inhibited (manufacturer advises avoid concomitant use) 
 * Ciclosporin Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration (risk of toxicity) 
   Efavirenz Plasma concentration of efavirenz possibly increased 
   Nifedipine Increased plasma nifedipine concentration 
 * Simvastatin Significantly increased plasma simvastatin concentration 
   Verapamil Increased plasma verapamil concentration 
Griseofulvin 
   Alcohol Possibly enhanced effects of alcohol 
   Ciclosporin Plasma ciclosporin concentration possibly reduced 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 
  (reduced contraceptive effect) 
 * Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Phenobarbital Reduced absorption of griseofulvin (reduced effect) 
 * Warfarin Reduced anticoagulant effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 537 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Haloperidol 
   Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
 * Amitriptyline Increased plasma amitriptyline concentration; possibly 
  increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Atropine Possibly reduced effects of haloperidol 
   Biperiden Possibly reduced effects of haloperidol 
 * Carbamazepine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); metabolism of haloperidol accelerated (reduced 

plasma concentration) 
 * Clomipramine Increased plasma clomipramine concentration; possibly 
  increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
   Codeine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Dopamine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ephedrine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
   Epinephrine Antagonism of hypertensive effect 
 * Ethosuximide Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
 * Fluoxetine Plasma concentration of haloperidol increased 
 * Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Antagonism of effects of levodopa 
   Lithium Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects and possibility of 

neurotoxicity 
   Methadone Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of 

extrapyramidal effects 
   Metoclopramide Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects 
   Morphine Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Phenobarbital Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); metabolism of haloperidol accelerated (reduced 

plasma concentration) 
 * Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
 * Procainamide Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of haloperidol (reduced plasma 
  haloperidol concentration) 
 * Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Valproic acid Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Halothane 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcuronium Effects of alcuronium enhanced 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 

538 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  
   Clomipramine Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Epinephrine Risk of arrhythmias 
   Ergometrine Reduced effect of ergometrine on parturient uterus 
 * Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Isoniazid Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Levodopa Risk of arrhythmias 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Oxytocin Oxytocic effect possibly reduced; enhanced hypotensive 

effect and risk of arrhythmias 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Suxamethonium Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Vancomycin Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
   Vecuronium Enhanced effects of vecuronium 
 * Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
Heparin 
 * Acetylsalicylic acid Enhanced anticoagulant effect of heparin 
   Enalapril Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
 * Glyceryl trinitrate Anticoagulant effect reduced by infusion of glyceryl 
  trinitrate 
   Ibuprofen Possibly increased risk of bleeding 
Hydralazine 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 539 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Hydrochlorothiazide 
   Acetazolamide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Allopurinol Increased risk of hypersensitivity, especially in renal 

impairment 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amphotericin B Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Calcium salts Increased risk of hypercalcaemia 
   Carbamazepine Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly 

hypermagnesaemia 
   Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
   Clomipramine Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Digoxin Hypokalaemia caused by hydrochlorothiazide increases 
  cardiac toxicity of digoxin 
 * Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ergocalciferol Increased risk of hypercalcaemia 
   Fluconazole Plasma concentration of fluconazole increased 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Ibuprofen Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 

540 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Lidocaine Action of lidocaine antagonized by hypokalaemia caused by 
  hydrochlorothiazide (interaction less likely when lidocaine 

used topically) 
 * Lithium Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity); furosemide safer than 

hydrochlorothiazide 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Quinidine Cardiac toxicity of quinidine increased by hypokalaemia 
  caused by hydrochlorothiazide 
   Salbutamol Increased risk of hypokalaemia with high doses of 

salbutamol 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Hydrocortisone 
   NOTE. Interactions do not generally apply to hydrocortisone used for topical 

application. 
 

   Acetazolamide Increased risk of hypokalaemia; antagonism of diuretic 
effect 

   Acetylsalicylic acid Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration; 
hydrocortisone reduces plasma salicylate concentration 

   Amiloride Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Amlodipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Amphotericin B Increased risk of hypokalaemia (avoid concomitant use 
  unless hydrocortisone needed to control reactions) 
   Atenolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Calcium salts Reduced absorption of calcium salts 
 * Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of hydrocortisone (reduced effect) 
   Contraceptives, Oral Oral contraceptives containing estrogens increase plasma 

concentration of hydrocortisone 
   Digoxin Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Enalapril Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Erythromycin Erythromycin possibly inhibits metabolism of 

hydrocortisone 
   Furosemide Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
   Ibuprofen Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Methotrexate Increased risk of haematological toxicity 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 541 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Methyldopa Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Mifepristone Possibly reduced effects of hydrocortisone for 3–4 days 
   Nifedipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Phenobarbital Metabolism of hydrocortisone accelerated (reduced effect) 
 * Phenytoin Metabolism of hydrocortisone accelerated (reduced effect) 
   Propranolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of hydrocortisone (reduced effect) 
   Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Salbutamol Increased risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of salbutamol 

given with hydrocortisone 
   Sodium nitroprusside Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Vaccine, Influenza High doses of hydrocortisone impair immune response 
 * Vaccine, Live High doses of hydrocortisone impair immune response; 
  avoid use of live vaccines with hydrocortisone 
   Verapamil Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced or reduced (high-
  dose hydrocortisone enhances anticoagulant effect) 
Hydroxocobalamin 
   Chloramphenicol Response to hydroxocobalamin reduced 
Ibuprofen 
   Acetazolamide Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect 
 * Acetylsalicylic acid Avoid concomitant use (increased adverse effects); 
  antiplatelet effect of acetylsalicylic acid possibly reduced 
   Amiloride Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect; possibly increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
   Amlodipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
 * Ciprofloxacin Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
   Dexamethasone Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration 
   Digoxin Possibly exacerbation of heart failure, reduced renal 

function, and increased plasma digoxin concentration 
   Enalapril Antagonism of hypotensive effect, increased risk of renal 

impairment 
 * Fluoxetine Increased risk of bleeding 
   Furosemide Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect 
 * Glibenclamide Possibly enhanced effect of glibenclamide 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Heparin Possibly increased risk of bleeding 
   Hydralazine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect 
   Hydrocortisone Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Levofloxacin Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
 * Lithium Reduced excretion of lithium (increased risk of toxicity) 
 * Methotrexate Excretion of methotrexate reduced (increased risk of 
  toxicity) 
   Methyldopa Antagonism of hypotensive effect 

542 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Mifepristone Avoidance of ibuprofen advised by manufacturer of 
mifepristone 

   Nifedipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Ofloxacin Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
   Penicillamine Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
 * Phenytoin Effect of phenytoin possibly enhanced 
   Prednisolone Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration 
   Propranolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Sodium nitroprusside Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect; possibly increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
   Verapamil Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
   Zidovudine Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
Imipenem + cilastatin 
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
Immunoglobulin (human), Anti-D 
 * Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live virus vaccine during 4 weeks before or 
  during 3 months after injection of anti-D immunoglobulin 

(impairment of immune response) but rubella vaccine 
(either as MMR or as single antigen rubella vaccine) may 
be given at the same time as anti-D immunoglobulin 

Immunoglobulin, Human normal 
* Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccine during 3 weeks before or during 

3 months after injection of human normal immunoglobulin 
(impairment of immune response) 

Indinavir 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Carbamazepine Possibly reduced plasma indinavir concentration 
   Dexamethasone Possibly reduced plasma indinavir concentration 
   Efavirenz Efavirenz reduces plasma concentration of indinavir 
   Nelfinavir Combination may lead to increased plasma concentration of 

either drug (or both drugs) 
   Nevirapine Nevirapine reduces plasma concentration of indinavir 
 * Phenobarbital Plasma concentration of indinavir possibly reduced 
   Phenytoin Plasma indinavir concentration possibly reduced 
 * Rifampicin Metabolism accelerated by rifampicin (plasma indinavir 
  concentration reduced—avoid concomitant use) 
   Ritonavir Ritonavir increases plasma concentration of indinavir 
   Saquinavir Indinavir increases plasma concentration of saquinavir 
 * Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
Insulins 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; atenolol may mask warning 

signs of hypoglycaemia such as tremor 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Enalapril Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Furosemide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 543 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Levonorgestrel Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Medroxyprogesterone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Nifedipine Occasionally impaired glucose tolerance 
   Norethisterone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; propranolol may mask 

warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as tremor 
   Testosterone Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Timolol Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; timolol may mask warning 

signs of hypoglycaemia such as tremor 
Iron 
   see Ferrous salts  
Isoniazid 
   Amitriptyline Increased plasma concentration of isoniazid 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of isoniazid 

  hydroxide; Magnesium 
   hydroxide) 

 * Carbamazepine Increased plasma carbamazepine concentration (also 
  isoniazid hepatotoxicity possibly increased) 
   Cycloserine Increased risk of CNS toxicity 
   Diazepam Metabolism of diazepam inhibited 
 * Ethosuximide Metabolism of ethosuximide inhibited (increased plasma 
  ethosuximide concentration and risk of toxicity) 
   Halothane Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   Ketamine Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   Nitrous oxide Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   p-Aminosalicylic acid Increased plasma concentration of isoniazid 
 * Phenytoin Metabolism of phenytoin inhibited (enhanced effect) 
   Thiopental Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
Isophane insulin 
   see Insulins  
Isosorbide dinitrate 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry mouth) 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atropine Possibly reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate 

tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

   Biperiden Possibly reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate 
tablets (failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry 
mouth) 

   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Clomipramine Reduced effect of sublingual isosorbide dinitrate tablets 

(failure to dissolve under the tongue owing to dry mouth) 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 

544 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Ketamine 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Clomipramine Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Isoniazid Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Vancomycin Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
 * Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
Lamivudine 
 Emtricitabine No information available; manufacturer advises avoid 

concomitant use 
   Sulfamethoxazole +  Plasma concentration of lamivudine increased (avoid 

  trimethoprim concomitant use of high-dose sulfamethoxazole + 
trimethoprim) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 545 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Levamisole 
   Alcohol Possibility of disulfiram-like reaction 
   Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
Levodopa + carbidopa 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atropine Absorption of levodopa possibly reduced 
   Biperiden Absorption of levodopa possibly reduced 
   Chlorpromazine Antagonism of effects of levodopa 
   Diazepam Possibly antagonism of levodopa effects 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ferrous salts Absorption of levodopa may be reduced by oral ferrous 

salts 
   Fluphenazine Antagonism of effects of levodopa 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Haloperidol Antagonism of effects of levodopa 
 * Halothane Risk of arrhythmias 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect; antagonism of 

antiparkinsonism effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Phenytoin Possibly reduced effects of levodopa 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Pyridoxine Antagonism of effects of levodopa unless carbidopa also 

given 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Levofloxacin 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of levofloxacin 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Ferrous salts Absorption of levofloxacin reduced by oral ferrous salts 
 * Ibuprofen Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
   Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
   Zinc sulfate Reduced absorption of levofloxacin 
Levonorgestrel 
   see also Contraceptives, Oral 
 * Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 

546 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Ciclosporin Inhibition of ciclosporin metabolism (increased plasma 
  ciclosporin concentration) 
   Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Griseofulvin Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Nelfinavir Contraceptive effect of levonorgestrel possibly reduced 
 * Nevirapine Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Phenobarbital Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Ritonavir Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Warfarin Antagonism of anticoagulant effect 
Levothyroxine 
   Amitriptyline Enhanced effects of amitriptyline 
   Calcium salts Reduced absorption of levothyroxine 
   Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism) 
   Clomipramine Possibly enhanced effects of clomipramine 
   Ferrous salts Absorption of levothyroxine reduced by oral ferrous salts 

(give at least 2 hours apart) 
   Phenobarbital Metabolism of levothyroxine accelerated (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism) 
   Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism); plasma 
concentration of phenytoin possibly increased 

   Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 
levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism) 

 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Lidocaine 
   NOTE. Interactions less likely when lidocaine is used topically. 

 
 * Acetazolamide Hypokalaemia caused by acetazolamide antagonizes action 
  of lidocaine 
 * Atenolol Increased myocardial depression 
   Bupivacaine Increased myocardial depression 
 * Furosemide Action of lidocaine antagonized by hypokalaemia caused by 
  furosemide 
 * Hydrochlorothiazide Action of lidocaine antagonized by hypokalaemia caused by 
  hydrochlorothiazide 
   Lopinavir Possibly increased plasma concentration of lidocaine 
 * Procainamide Increased myocardial depression 
 * Propranolol Increased myocardial depression; increased risk of lidocaine 
  toxicity 
 * Quinidine Increased myocardial depression 
   Suxamethonium Neuromuscular blockade enhanced and prolonged 
 * Timolol Increased myocardial depression 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 547 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Verapamil Increased risk of myocardial depression 
Lidocaine + epinephrine  
 see Lidocaine; (and epinephrine) 
Lithium 
 * Acetazolamide Excretion of lithium increased 
   Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
 * Amiloride Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity) 
   Amitriptyline Risk of toxicity 
   Carbamazepine Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 

concentration 
   Chlorpromazine Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects and possibility of 

neurotoxicity 
   Clomipramine Risk of toxicity 
 * Enalapril Enalapril reduces excretion of lithium (increased plasma 
  lithium concentration) 
 * Fluoxetine Increased risk of CNS effects (lithium toxicity reported) 
   Fluphenazine Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects and possibility of 

neurotoxicity 
 * Furosemide Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity); furosemide safer than 

hydrochlorothiazide 
   Haloperidol Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects and possibility of 

neurotoxicity 
 * Hydrochlorothiazide Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity); furosemide safer than 

hydrochlorothiazide 
 * Ibuprofen Reduced excretion of lithium (increased risk of toxicity) 
 * Methyldopa Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 
  concentration 
   Metronidazole Increased lithium toxicity reported 
   Neostigmine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Phenytoin Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 

concentration 
   Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
   Sodium hydrogen  Increased excretion of lithium (reduced plasma lithium 

  carbonate concentration) 
 * Spironolactone Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity) 
   Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Verapamil Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 

concentration 
Lopinavir 
   NOTE. In combination with ritonavir see also Ritonavir. 

 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Carbamazepine Possibly reduced plasma lopinavir concentration 
   Chlorphenamine Possibly increased plasma concentration of chlorphenamine 
 * Dexamethasone Possibly reduced plasma lopinavir concentration 
 * Efavirenz Plasma concentration of lopinavir reduced 
   Lidocaine Possibly increased plasma concentration of lidocaine 

548 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Nelfinavir Plasma concentration of lopinavir reduced; plasma 
concentration of active metabolite of nelfinavir increased 

   Nevirapine Plasma concentration of lopinavir possibly reduced 
 * Phenobarbital Plasma concentration of lopinavir possibly reduced 
 Phenytoin Plasma lopinavir concentration possibly reduced 
 * Rifampicin Reduced plasma concentration of lopinavir (avoid 
  concomitant use) 
   Saquinavir Increased plasma concentration of saquinavir 
 * Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
*  Tenofovir Plasma concentration of tenofovir increased 
Magnesium hydroxide 
   see Antacids  
Magnesium (parenteral) 
   Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
 * Nifedipine Profound hypotension reported with nifedipine and 
  intravenous magnesium sulfate in pre-eclampsia 
   Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Magnesium sulfate 
   see Magnesium (parenteral) 
Measles vaccine 
   see Vaccine, Live  
Mebendazole 
   Carbamazepine Reduced plasma mebendazole concentration (possibly 

increase mebendazole dose in tissue infection) 
   Phenobarbital Reduced plasma mebendazole concentration (possibly 

increase mebendazole dose in tissue infection) 
   Phenytoin Reduced plasma mebendazole concentration (possibly 

increase mebendazole dose in tissue infection) 
Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
 * Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Ciclosporin Inhibition of ciclosporin metabolism (increased plasma 
  ciclosporin concentration) 
   Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Griseofulvin Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate for 

contraception) 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Nevirapine Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Phenobarbital Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 549 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Ritonavir Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Warfarin Antagonism of anticoagulant effect 
Mefloquine 
   Amlodipine Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Atenolol Increased risk of bradycardia 
 * Carbamazepine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
 * Chloroquine Increased risk of convulsions 
 Digoxin Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
 * Ethosuximide Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
   Nifedipine Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
 * Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
   Propranolol Increased risk of bradycardia 
 * Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Quinine Increased risk of convulsions, but should not prevent the 
  use of intravenous quinine in severe cases 
   Timolol Increased risk of bradycardia 
 * Valproic acid Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
   Verapamil Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
Mercaptopurine 
 * Allopurinol Effects of mercaptopurine enhanced and toxicity increased; 
  reduce dose of mercaptopurine 
   Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
 * Sulfamethoxazole +  Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
    trimethoprim 
   Sulfasalazine Possibly increased risk of leukopenia 
 * Trimethoprim Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with mercaptopurine 

(impairment of immune response) 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly reduced 
Metformin 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; increased risk of lactic 

acidosis 
   Atenolol Atenolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Enalapril Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Furosemide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Levonorgestrel Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Medroxyprogesterone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Norethisterone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Propranolol Propranolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such 

as tremor 
   Testosterone Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 

550 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Timolol Timolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 
tremor 

Methadone 
   Abacavir Plasma concentration of methadone possibly reduced 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Amitriptyline Sedative effects possibly increased 
   Carbamazepine Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Clomipramine Sedative effects possibly increased 
   Diazepam Increased sedative effect 
   Efavirenz Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive and sedative effects 
   Metoclopramide Antagonism of effects of metoclopramide on 

gastrointestinal activity 
   Nelfinavir Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
   Nevirapine Possibly reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
   Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of methadone (reduced effect and 

risk of withdrawal symptoms) 
   Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of methadone (reduced effect) 
   Ritonavir Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
   Zidovudine Possibly increased plasma concentration of zidovudine 
Methotrexate 
 * Acetylsalicylic acid Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
   Amoxicillin Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
   Ampicillin Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
   Benzylpenicillin Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
 * Ciclosporin Increased toxicity 
 * Cisplatin Risk of pulmonary toxicity 
 * Dexamethasone Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
   Doxycycline Increased risk of methotrexate toxicity 
 * Hydrocortisone Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
 * Ibuprofen Excretion of methotrexate reduced (increased risk of 
  toxicity) 
 * Nitrous oxide Increased antifolate effect (avoid concomitant use) 
   Phenoxymethylpenicillin Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
   Phenytoin Reduced absorption of phenytoin; antifolate effect of 

methotrexate increased 
 * Prednisolone Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
 * Pyrimethamine Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased 
   Silver sulfadiazine Increased risk of methotrexate toxicity 
   Sulfadiazine Risk of methotrexate toxicity increased 
 * Sulfadoxine +  Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased; risk of 
    pyrimethamine methotrexate toxicity increased 
 * Sulfamethoxazole +  Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased (avoid 
    trimethoprim concomitant use); risk of methotrexate toxicity increased 
 * Trimethoprim Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased (avoid 
  concomitant use) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 551 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with methotrexate (impairment 
of immune response) 

Methyldopa 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of 

extrapyramidal effects 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ferrous salts Oral ferrous salts reduce hypotensive effect of methyldopa 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of 

extrapyramidal effects 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of 

extrapyramidal effects 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect; antagonism of 

antiparkinsonism effect 
 * Lithium Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 
  concentration 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Salbutamol Acute hypotension reported with salbutamol infusion 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Metoclopramide 
   Acetylsalicylic acid Enhanced effect of acetylsalicylic acid (increased rate of 

absorption) 
   Atropine Antagonism of effects of metoclopramide on 

gastrointestinal activity 
   Biperiden Antagonism of effects of metoclopramide on 

gastrointestinal activity 
   Chlorpromazine Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects 
 * Ciclosporin Plasma ciclosporin concentration increased 
   Codeine Antagonism of effect of metoclopramide on gastrointestinal 

activity 

552 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Fluphenazine Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects 
   Haloperidol Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects 
   Methadone Antagonism of effects of metoclopramide on 

gastrointestinal activity 
   Morphine Antagonism of effect of metoclopramide on gastrointestinal 

activity 
   Paracetamol Increased absorption of paracetamol 
   Suxamethonium Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
Metronidazole 
   Alcohol Disulfiram-like reaction 
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Fluorouracil Metabolism of fluorouracil inhibited (increased toxicity) 
   Lithium Increased lithium toxicity reported 
   Phenobarbital Metabolism of metronidazole accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
 * Phenytoin Metabolism of phenytoin inhibited (increased plasma 
  phenytoin concentration) 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Miconazole 
   Amphotericin B Possibly antagonism of effects of amphotericin B 
   Carbamazepine Plasma concentration of carbamazepine possibly increased 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Mifepristone 
   Acetylsalicylic acid Manufacturer of mifepristone advises avoid concomitant 

use 
   Beclomethasone Possibly reduced effects of inhaled beclomethasone for 3–

4 days 
   Dexamethasone Possibly reduced effects of dexamethasone for 3–4 days 
   Hydrocortisone Possibly reduced effects of hydrocortisone for 3–4 days 
   Ibuprofen Avoidance of ibuprofen advised by manufacturer of 

mifepristone 
   Prednisolone Possibly reduced effects of prednisolone for 3–4 days 
MMR vaccine 
   see Vaccine, Live  
Morphine 
   Alcohol Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effects 
   Amitriptyline Possibly increased sedation 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effects 
   Ciprofloxacin Manufacturer of ciprofloxacin advises avoid premedication 

with morphine (reduced plasma ciprofloxacin 
concentration) when ciprofloxacin used for surgical 
prophylaxis 

   Clomipramine Possibly increased sedation 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effects 
   Haloperidol Enhanced sedative and hypotensive effects 
   Metoclopramide Antagonism of effect of metoclopramide on gastrointestinal 

activity 
 * Ritonavir Ritonavir possibly increases plasma concentration of 
  morphine 

 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 553 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Nelfinavir 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Carbamazepine Possibly reduced plasma nelfinavir concentration 
 * Ciclosporin Possibly increased plasma ciclosporin concentration 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens (reduced contraceptive 
  effect); nelfinavir possibly reduces contraceptive effect of 

progestogens 
   Indinavir Combination may lead to increased plasma concentration of 

either drug (or both drugs) 
   Levonorgestrel Contraceptive effect of levonorgestrel possibly reduced 
   Lopinavir Plasma concentration of lopinavir reduced; plasma 

concentration of active metabolite of nelfinavir increased 
   Methadone Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
 * Norethisterone Possibly reduced contraceptive effect 
 * Phenobarbital Plasma concentration of nelfinavir possibly reduced 
   Phenytoin Reduced plasma phenytoin concentration 
 * Quinidine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias (avoid 
  concomitant use) 
 * Rifampicin Plasma concentration of nelfinavir significantly reduced 
  (avoid concomitant use) 
   Ritonavir Combination may lead to increased plasma concentration of 

either drug (or both drugs) 
   Saquinavir Combination may lead to increased plasma concentration of 

either drug (or both drugs) 
 * Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
Neostigmine 
   Alcuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
 * Amikacin Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Atropine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Biperiden Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Chloroquine Chloroquine has potential to increase symptoms of 

myasthenia gravis and thus diminish effect of neostigmine 
   Clindamycin Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
 * Gentamicin Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
 Lithium Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
*  Paromomycin Possibly antagonism 
   Procainamide Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Propranolol Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Quinidine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
 * Streptomycin Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
   Suxamethonium Effect of suxamethonium enhanced 
   Vecuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
Nevirapine 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 
  (reduced contraceptive effect) 
   Efavirenz Plasma efavirenz concentration reduced 
 * Fluconazole Increased plasma concentration of nevirapine 
 Indinavir Nevirapine reduces plasma concentration of indinavir 
 * Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Lopinavir Plasma concentration of lopinavir possibly reduced 

554 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
   Methadone Possibly reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
 * Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Rifampicin Reduced plasma concentration of nevirapine (avoid 
  concomitant use) 
   Saquinavir Plasma concentration of saquinavir reduced 
 * Warfarin Enhanced or reduced anticoagulant effect 
Nifedipine 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect; possibly severe hypotension 
  and heart failure 
   Carbamazepine Probably reduced effect of nifedipine 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ciclosporin Possibly increased plasma nifedipine concentration 

(increased risk of adverse effects such as gingival 
hyperplasia) 

   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Digoxin Possibly increased plasma concentration of digoxin 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Grapefruit juice Increased plasma nifedipine concentration 
   Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Insulins Occasionally impaired glucose tolerance 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Magnesium (parenteral) Profound hypotension reported with nifedipine and 
  intravenous magnesium sulfate in pre-eclampsia 
   Mefloquine Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Phenobarbital Effect of nifedipine probably reduced 
 * Phenytoin Probably reduced effect of nifedipine 
 Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect; possibly severe hypotension 
  and heart failure 
  Quinidine Reduced plasma quinidine concentration 
 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of nifedipine (plasma concentration 
  significantly reduced) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 555 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect; possibly severe hypotension 
  and heart failure 
   Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Vincristine Possibly reduced metabolism of vincristine 
Nitrous oxide 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Clomipramine Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Isoniazid Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Methotrexate Increased antifolate effect (avoid concomitant use) 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Vancomycin Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
 * Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
Norethisterone 
   see also Contraceptives, Oral 

 
 * Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Ciclosporin Inhibition of ciclosporin metabolism (increased plasma 
  ciclosporin concentration) 
   Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Griseofulvin Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
   Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
 * Nelfinavir Possibly reduced contraceptive effect 
 * Nevirapine Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Phenobarbital Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 

556 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
contraceptive effect) 

 * Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
contraceptive effect) 

 * Ritonavir Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
contraceptive effect) 

 * Warfarin Antagonism of anticoagulant effect 
Ofloxacin 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of ofloxacin 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Ferrous salts Absorption of ofloxacin reduced by oral ferrous salts 
 * Ibuprofen Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
  
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
  
   Zinc sulfate Reduced absorption of ofloxacin 
Oxygen 
 * Bleomycin Serious pulmonary toxicity in patients exposed to 
  conventional oxygen concentrations during anaesthesia 
Oxytocin 
   Ephedrine Risk of hypertension due to enhanced vasopressor effect of 

ephedrine 
   Epinephrine Risk of hypertension due to enhanced vasopressor effect of 

epinephrine 
   Halothane Oxytocic effect possibly reduced; enhanced hypotensive 

effect and risk of arrhythmias 
p-Aminosalicylic acid 
   Isoniazid Increased plasma concentration of isoniazid 
Paracetamol 
   Metoclopramide Increased absorption of paracetamol 
   Warfarin Prolonged regular use of paracetamol possibly enhances 

anticoagulant effect 
Paromomycin 
 Amphotericin B Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
 Cisplatin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
 Furosemide Increased risk of ototoxicity 
*  Neostigmine Possibly antagonism of neostigmine 
*  Pyridostigmine Possibly antagonism of pyridostigmine 
*  Suxamethonium Possibly enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
 Vancomycin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
Penicillamine 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of penicillamine 

  hydroxide; Magnesium 
   hydroxide) 

   Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly reduced 
   Ferrous salts Oral ferrous salts reduce absorption of penicillamine 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 557 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Ibuprofen Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
   Zinc sulfate Absorption of penicillamine and zinc sulfate reduced 
Pentamidine 
   Amphotericin B Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
Phenobarbital 
   Abacavir Plasma concentration of abacavir possibly reduced 
   Acetazolamide Increased risk of osteomalacia 
   Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
 * Amitriptyline Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); metabolism of amitriptyline possibly accelerated 

(reduced plasma concentration) 
 * Amlodipine Probably reduced effect of amlodipine 
 * Carbamazepine May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
  antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of 

carbamazepine reduced 
 * Chloramphenicol Metabolism of chloramphenicol accelerated (reduced 
  plasma chloramphenicol concentration) 
 * Chlorpromazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Ciclosporin Metabolism of ciclosporin accelerated (reduced effect) 
 * Clomipramine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); metabolism of clomipramine possibly 

accelerated (reduced plasma concentration) 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Metabolism of estrogens and progestogens accelerated 
  (reduced contraceptive effect) 
 * Dexamethasone Metabolism of dexamethasone accelerated (reduced effect) 
   Doxycycline Metabolism of doxycycline accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
   Ergocalciferol Ergocalciferol requirements possibly increased 
   Ethosuximide May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of ethosuximide 
possibly reduced 

   Etoposide Possibly reduced plasma concentration of etoposide 
 Fluoxetine Antagonism of anticonvulsive effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
 * Fluphenazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Folic acid; folinic acid Plasma concentration of phenobarbital possibly reduced 
   Griseofulvin Reduced absorption of griseofulvin (reduced effect) 
 * Haloperidol Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); metabolism of haloperidol accelerated (reduced 

plasma concentration) 
 * Hydrocortisone Metabolism of hydrocortisone accelerated (reduced effect) 
 * Indinavir Plasma concentration of indinavir possibly reduced 
 * Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Levothyroxine Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism) 
 * Lopinavir Plasma concentration of lopinavir possibly reduced 
   Mebendazole Reduced plasma mebendazole concentration (possibly 

increase mebendazole dose in tissue infection) 

558 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
   Metronidazole Metabolism of metronidazole accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
 * Nelfinavir Plasma concentration of nelfinavir possibly reduced 
 * Nifedipine Effect of nifedipine probably reduced 
 * Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Phenytoin May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of phenytoin 
often lowered but may be raised; plasma concentration of 
phenobarbital often raised 

 * Prednisolone Metabolism of prednisolone accelerated (reduced effect) 
   Quinidine Metabolism of quinidine accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
 * Saquinavir Plasma concentration of saquinavir possibly reduced 
   Valproic acid May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of valproic acid 
reduced; plasma phenobarbital concentration increased 

 * Verapamil Effect of verapamil probably reduced 
 * Warfarin Metabolism of warfarin accelerated (reduced anticoagulant 
  effect) 
Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
   Contraceptives, Oral Contraceptive effect of estrogens possibly reduced (risk 

probably small) 
   Methotrexate Reduced excretion of methotrexate (increased risk of 

toxicity) 
Phenytoin 
   Abacavir Plasma concentration of abacavir possibly reduced 
   Acetazolamide Increased risk of osteomalacia 
   Acetylsalicylic acid Enhancement of effect of phenytoin 
   Alcohol Plasma phenytoin concentration reduced with regular large 

amounts of alcohol 
   Alcuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (accelerated recovery 

from neuromuscular blockade) 
 * Amitriptyline Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); possibly reduced plasma amitriptyline 

concentration 
   Amlodipine Probably reduced effect of amlodipine 
   Antacids (Aluminium Reduced absorption of phenytoin 

   hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

   Azathioprine Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Bleomycin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
 * Carbamazepine May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
  antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of phenytoin 

often lowered but may be raised; plasma concentration of 
carbamazepine often lowered 

   Chlorambucil Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
 * Chloramphenicol Plasma phenytoin concentration increased (increased risk of 
  toxicity) 
   Chloroquine Possibly increased risk of convulsions 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 559 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Chlorpromazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Ciclosporin Accelerated metabolism of ciclosporin (reduced plasma 
  ciclosporin concentration) 
   Ciprofloxacin Plasma phenytoin concentration can be increased or 

decreased by ciprofloxacin 
   Cisplatin Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
 * Clomipramine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered); possibly reduced plasma clomipramine 

concentration 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 
  (reduced contraceptive effect) 
   Cyclophosphamide Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Cytarabine Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Dacarbazine Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Dactinomycin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Daunorubicin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
 * Dexamethasone Metabolism of dexamethasone accelerated (reduced effect) 
   Diazepam Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased or 

decreased by diazepam 
   Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly reduced 
   Doxorubicin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Doxycycline Increased metabolism of doxycycline (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
   Ergocalciferol Ergocalciferol requirements possibly increased 
 * Ethosuximide May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
  antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of phenytoin 

possibly increased; plasma concentration of ethosuximide 
possibly reduced 

   Etoposide Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin and possibly 
reduced plasma concentration of etoposide 

 * Fluconazole Plasma concentration of phenytoin increased (consider 
  reducing dose of phenytoin) 
   Fluorouracil Metabolism of phenytoin possibly inhibited (increased risk 

of toxicity) 
 * Fluoxetine Plasma concentration of phenytoin increased 
 * Fluphenazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Folic acid; folinic acid Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly reduced 
 * Haloperidol Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 

lowered) 
 * Hydrocortisone Metabolism of hydrocortisone accelerated (reduced effect) 
 * Ibuprofen Effect of phenytoin possibly enhanced 
   Indinavir Plasma indinavir concentration possibly reduced 
 * Isoniazid Metabolism of phenytoin inhibited (enhanced effect) 
   Levamisole Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased 
   Levodopa Possibly reduced effects of levodopa 
 * Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Levothyroxine Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism); plasma 
concentration of phenytoin possibly increased 

   Lithium Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 
concentration 

560 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Lopinavir Plasma lopinavir concentration possibly reduced 
   Mebendazole Reduced plasma mebendazole concentration (possibly 

increase mebendazole dose in tissue infection) 
 * Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
 * Mefloquine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
   Mercaptopurine Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Methadone Accelerated metabolism of methadone (reduced effect and 

risk of withdrawal symptoms) 
   Methotrexate Reduced absorption of phenytoin; antifolate effect of 

methotrexate increased 
 * Metronidazole Metabolism of phenytoin inhibited (increased plasma 
  phenytoin concentration) 
   Nelfinavir Reduced plasma phenytoin concentration 
*  Nifedipine Probably reduced effect of nifedipine 
* Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 

contraceptive effect) 
  Phenobarbital May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of phenytoin 
often lowered but may be raised; plasma concentration of 
phenobarbital often raised 

  Praziquantel Plasma praziquantel concentration reduced 
* Prednisolone Metabolism of prednisolone accelerated (reduced effect) 
  Procarbazine Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
* Pyrimethamine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect; increased antifolate 

effect 
* Quinidine Accelerated metabolism of quinidine (reduced plasma 

quinidine concentration) 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of phenytoin (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
 Saquinavir Plasma saquinavir concentration possibly reduced 
  Silver sulfadiazine Possibly increased plasma concentration of phenytoin 
  Sulfadiazine Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased 
*  Sulfadoxine +  Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased; 

  pyrimethamine increased antifolate effect 
 * Sulfamethoxazole +  Antifolate effect and plasma phenytoin concentration 

  trimethoprim increased 
 * Trimethoprim Antifolate effect and plasma phenytoin concentration 

increased 
  Vaccine, Influenza Enhanced effect of phenytoin 
   Valproic acid May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of valproic acid 
reduced; plasma concentration of phenytoin increased or 
possibly reduced 

 Vecuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (accelerated recovery 
from neuromuscular blockade) 

  Verapamil Reduced effect of verapamil 
  Vinblastine Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vincristine Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
* Warfarin Accelerated metabolism of warfarin (possibility of reduced 

anticoagulant effect, but enhancement also reported) 
  Zidovudine Plasma phenytoin concentration increased or decreased by 

zidovudine 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 561 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Phytomenadione 
* Warfarin Antagonism of anticoagulant effect  
Pilocarpine 
  Atenolol Increased risk of arrhythmias 
  Atropine Antagonism of effects of pilocarpine 
  Biperiden Antagonism of effects of pilocarpine 
  Propranolol Increased risk of arrhythmias 
  Timolol Increased risk of arrhythmias 
Poliomyelitis, Vaccine (oral) 
  see Vaccine, Live  
Potassium chloride 
  see Potassium salts  
Potassium salts 
* Amiloride Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
* Enalapril Increased risk of severe hyperkalaemia 
* Spironolactone Risk of hyperkalaemia 
Praziquantel 
  Albendazole Increased plasma concentration of active metabolite of 

albendazole 
 Carbamazepine Plasma praziquantel concentration reduced 
  Chloroquine Plasma praziquantel concentration possibly reduced 
  Dexamethasone Plasma praziquantel concentration reduced 
  Phenytoin Plasma praziquantel concentration reduced 
Prednisolone 
  Acetazolamide Increased risk of hypokalaemia; antagonism of diuretic 

effect 
  Acetylsalicylic acid Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration; 

prednisolone reduces plasma salicylate concentration 
  Amiloride Antagonism of diuretic effect 
  Amlodipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Amphotericin B Increased risk of hypokalaemia (avoid concomitant use 

unless prednisolone needed to control reactions) 
  Atenolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Calcium salts Reduced absorption of calcium salts 
* Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of prednisolone (reduced effect) 
 Ciclosporin Increased plasma concentration of prednisolone 
  Contraceptives, Oral Oral contraceptives containing estrogens increase plasma 

concentration of prednisolone 
   Digoxin Increased risk of hypokalaemia 
   Enalapril Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Erythromycin Erythromycin possibly inhibits metabolism of prednisolone 
   Furosemide Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
  Glibenclamide Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Hydralazine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of 

hypokalaemia 
  Ibuprofen Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and ulceration 
  Insulins Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Metformin Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect 

562 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

* Methotrexate Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
  Methyldopa Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Mifepristone Possibly reduced effects of prednisolone for 3–4 days 
  Nifedipine Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Phenobarbital Metabolism of prednisolone accelerated (reduced effect) 
* Phenytoin Metabolism of prednisolone accelerated (reduced effect) 
  Propranolol Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of prednisolone (reduced effect) 
  Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Salbutamol Increased risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of salbutamol 

given with prednisolone 
  Sodium nitroprusside Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Vaccine, Influenza High doses of prednisolone impair immune response 
 * Vaccine, Live High doses of prednisolone impair immune response; avoid 
  use of live vaccines with prednisolone 
   Verapamil Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced or reduced (high-

dose prednisolone enhances anticoagulant effect) 
Primaquine 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
Procainamide 
 * Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
 * Amitriptyline Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Artemether +  Risk of ventricular arrhythmias; manufacturer of artemether 
    lumefantrine + lumefantrine advises avoid concomitant use 
 * Atenolol Increased myocardial depression 
   Bupivacaine Increased myocardial depression 
 * Chlorpromazine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Clomipramine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Fluphenazine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Haloperidol Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Lidocaine Increased myocardial depression (interaction less likely 

when lidocaine used topically) 
   Neostigmine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
 * Propranolol Increased risk of myocardial depression 
   Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
 * Quinidine Increased myocardial depression 
   Sulfamethoxazole +  Increased plasma procainamide concentration 

  trimethoprim 
 * Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
 * Timolol Increased myocardial depression 
   Trimethoprim Increased plasma procainamide concentration 
 * Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Procaine benzylpenicillin 
   see Benzylpenicillin  
Procarbazine 
   Alcohol Disulfiram-like reaction 
   Phenytoin Reduced absorption of phenytoin 
   Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with procarbazine (impairment of 

immune response) 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 563 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Proguanil 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Pyrimethamine Increased antifolate effect 
   Warfarin Isolated reports of enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Promethazine 
   Alcohol Enhanced sedative effect 
   Amitriptyline Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
   Atropine Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Biperiden Increased risk of antimuscarinic adverse effects 
  Clomipramine Increased antimuscarinic and sedative effects 
  Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
Propranolol 
  Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Bupivacaine Increased risk of bupivacaine toxicity 
*  Chlorpromazine Concomitant administration may increase plasma 

concentration of both drugs; enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Digoxin Increased risk of AV block and bradycardia 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Epinephrine Severe hypertension 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glibenclamide Propranolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such 

as tremor 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Insulins Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; propranolol may mask 

warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as tremor 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Lidocaine Increased myocardial depression; increased risk of lidocaine 
  toxicity (interaction less likely when lidocaine used 

topically) 
   Mefloquine Increased risk of bradycardia 
   Metformin Propranolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such 

as tremor 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Neostigmine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
 * Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect; possibly severe hypotension 

and heart failure 
  Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 

564 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Pilocarpine Increased risk of arrhythmias 
  Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
 * Procainamide Increased risk of myocardial depression 
   Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
* Quinidine Increased myocardial depression 
  Rifampicin Metabolism of propranolol accelerated (significantly 

reduced plasma concentration) 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Verapamil Asystole, severe hypotension, and heart failure 
Pyridostigmine 
  Alcuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
* Amikacin Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
  Atropine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
  Biperiden Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
  Chloroquine Chloroquine has potential to increase symptoms of 

myasthenia gravis and thus diminish effect of 
pyridostigmine 

  Clindamycin Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
 * Gentamicin Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
   Lithium Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
* Paromomycin Possibly antagonism 
  Procainamide Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
  Propranolol Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
  Quinidine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
* Streptomycin Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
  Suxamethonium Effect of suxamethonium enhanced 
 Vecuronium Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
Pyridoxine 
  Levodopa Antagonism of effects of levodopa unless carbidopa also 

given 
Pyrimethamine 
*  Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

  lumefantrine concomitant use 
* Methotrexate Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased 
* Phenytoin Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect; increased antifolate 

effect 
  Proguanil Increased antifolate effect 
* Silver sulfadiazine Increased antifolate effect 
* Sulfadiazine Increased antifolate effect 
* Sulfamethoxazole +  Increased antifolate effect 

  trimethoprim 
* Trimethoprim Increased antifolate effect 
   Zidovudine Increased antifolate effect 
Pyrimethamine + sulfadoxine 
  see Sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine 
Quinidine 
*  Acetazolamide Cardiac toxicity of quinidine increased if hypokalaemia 

occurs; acetazolamide possibly reduces excretion of 
quinidine (increased plasma concentration) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 565 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

* Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Amitriptyline Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced quinidine excretion in alkaline urine (plasma 

  hydroxide; Magnesium quinidine concentration occasionally increased) 
   hydroxide) 

*  Artemether +  Risk of ventricular arrhythmias; manufacturer of artemether 
  lumefantrine + lumefantrine advises avoid concomitant use 

* Atenolol Increased myocardial depression 
 Bupivacaine Increased myocardial depression 
  Chloroquine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
* Chlorpromazine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
* Clomipramine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
* Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin increased (halve dose of 

digoxin) 
* Erythromycin Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias with parenteral 

erythromycin 
*  Fluphenazine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Furosemide Cardiac toxicity of quinidine increased by hypokalaemia 

caused by furosemide 
 * Haloperidol Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Hydrochlorothiazide Cardiac toxicity of quinidine increased by hypokalaemia 

caused by hydrochlorothiazide 
* Lidocaine Increased myocardial depression (interaction less likely 

when lidocaine used topically) 
* Mefloquine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
* Nelfinavir Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias (avoid 

concomitant use) 
  Neostigmine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
  Nifedipine Reduced plasma quinidine concentration 
  Phenobarbital Metabolism of quinidine accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
* Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of quinidine (reduced plasma 

quinidine concentration) 
* Procainamide Increased myocardial depression 
* Propranolol Increased myocardial depression 
 Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of quinidine (reduced plasma 

quinidine concentration) 
* Ritonavir Increased plasma quinidine concentration (increased risk of 

ventricular arrhythmias—avoid concomitant use) 
* Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Timolol Increased myocardial depression 
* Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Verapamil Increased plasma quinidine concentration (extreme 

hypotension may occur) 
* Warfarin Anticoagulant effect may be enhanced 
Quinine 
 * Artemether +  Risk of ventricular arrhythmias; manufacturer of artemether 
    lumefantrine + lumefantrine advises avoid concomitant use 
   Chloroquine Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin increased 
  
 * Mefloquine Increased risk of convulsions, but should not prevent the 
  use of intravenous quinine in severe cases 

566 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Suxamethonium Possibly enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
Ribavirin 
* Didanosine Increased risk of adverse effects; manufacturer of ribavirin 

advises avoid concomitant use 
* Stavudine Possibly inhibited effects of stavudine 
* Zidovudine Possibly inhibited effects of zidovudine 
Rifampicin 
   Abacavir Plasma concentration of abacavir possibly reduced 
   Amitriptyline Plasma concentration of amitriptyline possibly reduced 
   Antacids (Aluminium  Reduced absorption of rifampicin 

  hydroxide; Magnesium  
  hydroxide) 

   Chloramphenicol Accelerated metabolism of chloramphenicol (reduced 
plasma chloramphenicol concentration) 

 * Ciclosporin Accelerated metabolism of ciclosporin (reduced plasma 
  ciclosporin concentration) 
   Clomipramine Plasma concentration of clomipramine possibly reduced 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens and progestogens 
  (reduced contraceptive effect) 
   Dapsone Reduced plasma dapsone concentration 
 * Dexamethasone Accelerated metabolism of dexamethasone (reduced effect) 
  
   Diazepam Metabolism of diazepam accelerated (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
   Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly reduced 
   Doxycycline Plasma doxycycline concentration possibly reduced 
   Efavirenz Reduced plasma concentration of efavirenz (increase 

efavirenz dose) 
 * Fluconazole Accelerated metabolism of fluconazole (reduced plasma 
  concentration) 
 * Glibenclamide Possibly accelerated metabolism (reduced effect) of 
  glibenclamide 
 * Haloperidol Accelerated metabolism of haloperidol (reduced plasma 
  haloperidol concentration) 
 * Hydrocortisone Accelerated metabolism of hydrocortisone (reduced effect) 
  
 * Indinavir Metabolism accelerated by rifampicin (plasma indinavir 
  concentration reduced—avoid concomitant use) 
 * Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
   Levothyroxine Accelerated metabolism of levothyroxine (may increase 

levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroidism) 
 * Lopinavir Reduced plasma concentration of lopinavir (avoid 
  concomitant use) 
 * Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
   Methadone Accelerated metabolism of methadone (reduced effect) 
 * Nelfinavir Plasma concentration of nelfinavir significantly reduced 
  (avoid concomitant use) 
 * Nevirapine Reduced plasma concentration of nevirapine (avoid 
  concomitant use) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 567 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Nifedipine Accelerated metabolism of nifedipine (plasma concentration 
significantly reduced) 

 * Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of phenytoin (reduced plasma 

concentration) 
 * Prednisolone Accelerated metabolism of prednisolone (reduced effect) 
   Propranolol Metabolism of propranolol accelerated (significantly 

reduced plasma concentration) 
 * Quinidine Accelerated metabolism of quinidine (reduced plasma 

quinidine concentration) 
 * Saquinavir Plasma concentration of saquinavir significantly reduced—

avoid concomitant use 
 * Verapamil Accelerated metabolism of verapamil (plasma concentration 

significantly reduced) 
 * Warfarin Accelerated metabolism of warfarin (reduced anticoagulant 

effect) 
 Zidovudine Manufacturer of zidovudine advises avoid concomitant use 
Ritonavir 
 * Amitriptyline Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Amlodipine Possibly increased plasma concentration of amlodipine 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 

  lumefantrine concomitant use 
 Azithromycin Plasma concentration of azithromycin possibly increased 
 * Carbamazepine Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Chlorpromazine Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Ciclosporin Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Clomipramine Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Codeine Ritonavir possibly increases plasma concentration of 

codeine 
 * Contraceptives, Oral Accelerated metabolism of estrogens (reduced contraceptive 
  effect) 
   Dexamethasone Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Diazepam Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir (risk of 
  extreme sedation and respiratory depression—avoid 

concomitant use) 
   Efavirenz Increased risk of toxicity (monitor liver function tests) 
   Erythromycin Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Fluconazole Plasma concentration of fluconazole increased by ritonavir 
 * Fluoxetine Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Fluphenazine Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Haloperidol Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Hydrocortisone Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Ibuprofen Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
   Indinavir Ritonavir increases plasma concentration of indinavir 
 * Levonorgestrel Accelerated metabolism of levonorgestrel (reduced 
  contraceptive effect) 
 * Medroxyprogesterone Accelerated metabolism of medroxyprogesterone (does not 
  apply to injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate used for 

contraception) 
   Methadone Reduced plasma concentration of methadone 
 * Morphine Ritonavir possibly increases plasma concentration of 

morphine 

568 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Nelfinavir Combination may lead to increased plasma concentration of 
either drug (or both drugs) 

 * Nifedipine Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Norethisterone Accelerated metabolism of norethisterone (reduced 

contraceptive effect) 
   Prednisolone Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Quinidine Increased plasma quinidine concentration (increased risk of 

ventricular arrhythmias—avoid concomitant use) 
  Saquinavir Ritonavir increases plasma concentration of saquinavir 
 * Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Verapamil Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
 * Warfarin Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
Rotavirus vaccine  
 see Vaccine, live  
Rubella vaccine 
   see Vaccine, live  
Salbutamol 
   Acetazolamide Increased risk of hypokalaemia with high doses of 

salbutamol 
   Dexamethasone Increased risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of salbutamol 

given with dexamethasone 
   Digoxin Possibly reduced plasma concentration of digoxin 
   Furosemide Increased risk of hypokalaemia with high doses of 

salbutamol 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Increased risk of hypokalaemia with high doses of 

salbutamol 
   Hydrocortisone Increased risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of salbutamol 

given with hydrocortisone 
 * Methyldopa Acute hypotension reported with salbutamol infusion 
   Prednisolone Increased risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of salbutamol 

given with prednisolone 
Saquinavir 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
   Carbamazepine Possibly reduced plasma saquinavir concentration 
 * Ciclosporin Plasma concentration of both ciclosporin and saquinavir 
  increased 
   Dexamethasone Possibly reduced plasma saquinavir concentration 
   Efavirenz Efavirenz significantly reduces plasma concentration of 

saquinavir 
   Fluconazole Plasma concentration of saquinavir possibly increased 
   Indinavir Indinavir increases plasma concentration of saquinavir 
   Lopinavir Increased plasma concentration of saquinavir 
   Nelfinavir Combination may lead to increased plasma concentration of 

either drug (or both drugs) 
   Nevirapine Plasma concentration of saquinavir reduced 
 * Phenobarbital Plasma concentration of saquinavir possibly reduced 
   Phenytoin Plasma saquinavir concentration possibly reduced 
 * Rifampicin Plasma concentration of saquinavir significantly reduced—

avoid concomitant use 
 * Ritonavir Ritonavir increases plasma concentration of saquinavir 
 * Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
 Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 569 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Silver sulfadiazine 
   NOTE. Interactions may apply when silver sulfadiazine is used to treat large areas of 

skin. 
 

 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; possibly reduced plasma 
concentration of ciclosporin 

 Glibenclamide Effects of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
   Methotrexate Increased risk of methotrexate toxicity 
   Phenytoin Possibly increased plasma concentration of phenytoin 
 * Pyrimethamine Increased antifolate effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced effects of thiopental 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Simvastatin 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Clotrimazole Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Erythromycin Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Grapefruit juice Significantly increased plasma simvastatin concentration 
 * Indinavir Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Lopinavir Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Nelfinavir Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Ritonavir Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Saquinavir Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Verapamil Increased risk of myopathy 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Sodium fluoride 
   Calcium salts Reduced absorption of sodium fluoride 
Sodium hydrogen carbonate 
   Lithium Increased excretion of lithium (reduced plasma lithium 

concentration) 
Sodium lactate, compound solution 
   see Potassium salts; Sodium hydrogen carbonate 
Sodium nitroprusside 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 

570 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 
Sodium valproate 
   see Valproic acid  
Soluble insulin 
   see Insulins  
Spironolactone 
   Acetylsalicylic acid Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Carbamazepine Increased risk of hyponatraemia 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
   Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
   Clomipramine Increased risk of postural hypotension 
   Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of diuretic effect by estrogens 
   Dexamethasone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin increased 
 * Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect; increased risk of severe 
  hyperkalaemia (monitor plasma potassium concentration 

with low-dose spironolactone in heart failure) 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrocortisone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Ibuprofen Risk of nephrotoxicity of ibuprofen increased; antagonism 

of diuretic effect; possibly increased risk of hyperkalaemia 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Lithium Reduced lithium excretion (increased plasma lithium 
  concentration and risk of toxicity) 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Potassium salts Risk of hyperkalaemia 
   Prednisolone Antagonism of diuretic effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 571 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Stavudine 
 * Didanosine Increased risk of adverse effects 
   Doxorubicin Doxorubicin may inhibit effects of stavudine 
 * Ribavirin Possibly inhibited effects of stavudine 
 * Zidovudine May inhibit effect of stavudine (avoid concomitant use) 
Streptomycin 
 * Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Amphotericin B Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
   Capreomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
 * Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
 * Furosemide Increased risk of ototoxicity 
 * Neostigmine Antagonism of effect of neostigmine 
 * Pyridostigmine Antagonism of effect of pyridostigmine 
 * Suxamethonium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Vancomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
 * Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  
Sulfadiazine 
 * Ciclosporin Plasma ciclosporin concentration possibly reduced; 

increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
   Glibenclamide Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
   Methotrexate Risk of methotrexate toxicity increased 
   Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased 
 * Pyrimethamine Increased antifolate effect 
 * Sulfadoxine +  Increased antifolate effect 
    pyrimethamine 
   Thiopental Enhanced effects of thiopental 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine 
 * Artemether +  Manufacturer of artemether + lumefantrine advises avoid 
    lumefantrine concomitant use 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
   Glibenclamide Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
 * Methotrexate Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased; risk of 
  methotrexate toxicity increased 
 * Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration possibly increased; 
  increased antifolate effect 
 * Sulfadiazine Increased antifolate effect 
 * Sulfamethoxazole +  Increased antifolate effect 
    trimethoprim 
   Thiopental Enhanced effects of thiopental 
 * Trimethoprim Increased antifolate effect 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim 
 * Azathioprine Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; plasma ciclosporin 
  concentration possibly reduced by intravenous 

trimethoprim 
   Dapsone Plasma concentration of both dapsone and trimethoprim 

may increase with concomitant use 
   Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly increased 
   Glibenclamide Effect of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 

572 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Lamivudine Plasma concentration of lamivudine increased (avoid 
concomitant use of high-dose sulfamethoxazole + 
trimethoprim) 

 * Mercaptopurine Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
 * Methotrexate Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased (avoid 
  concomitant use); risk of methotrexate toxicity increased 
 * Phenytoin Antifolate effect and plasma phenytoin concentration 
  increased 
   Procainamide Increased plasma procainamide concentration 
 * Pyrimethamine Increased antifolate effect 
 * Sulfadoxine +  Increased antifolate effect 
    pyrimethamine 
   Thiopental Enhanced effects of thiopental 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Sulfasalazine 
   Azathioprine Possibly increased risk of leukopenia 
   Digoxin Absorption of digoxin possibly reduced 
   Folic acid and Folinic Possibly reduced absorption of folic acid 

acid 
   Mercaptopurine Possibly increased risk of leukopenia 
Suxamethonium 
 * Amikacin Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
 * Clindamycin Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
   Cyclophosphamide Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
   Digoxin Risk of ventricular arrhythmias 
 * Gentamicin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Halothane Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
   Lidocaine Neuromuscular blockade enhanced and prolonged 

(interaction less likely when lidocaine used topically) 
   Lithium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Magnesium (parenteral) Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Metoclopramide Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
   Neostigmine Effect of suxamethonium enhanced 
*  Paromomycin Possibly enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
 * Procainamide Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Pyridostigmine Effect of suxamethonium enhanced 
 * Quinidine Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
   Quinine Possibly enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
 * Streptomycin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
 * Vancomycin Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
   Verapamil Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
Tamoxifen 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Tenofovir 
 Didanosine Plasma concentration of didanosine increased (increased 

risk of toxicity — avoid concomitant use) 
* Lopinavir Plasma concentration of tenofovir increased 
Testosterone 
   Glibenclamide Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Insulins Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
   Metformin Hypoglycaemic effect possibly enhanced 
 * Warfarin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 573 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

Thiopental 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amitriptyline Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Atenolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Clomipramine Increased risk of arrhythmias and hypotension 
   Diazepam Enhanced sedative effect 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Isoniazid Possible potentiation of isoniazid hepatotoxicity 
   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Propranolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Silver sulfadiazine Enhanced effects of thiopental 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Sulfadiazine Enhanced effects of thiopental 
   Sulfadoxine +  Enhanced effects of thiopental 

  pyrimethamine 
   Sulfamethoxazole +  Enhanced effects of thiopental 

  trimethoprim 
   Timolol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Vancomycin Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
* Verapamil Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
Timolol 
   NOTE. Systemic absorption may follow topical application of timolol to the eye. 

 
   Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Amlodipine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Digoxin Increased AV block and bradycardia 
   Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Epinephrine Severe hypertension 
   Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Glibenclamide Timolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
   Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 

574 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Insulins Enhanced hypoglycaemic effect; timolol may mask warning 
signs of hypoglycaemia such as tremor 

   Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Lidocaine Increased myocardial depression (interaction less likely 
  when lidocaine used topically) 
   Mefloquine Increased risk of bradycardia 
   Metformin Timolol may mask warning signs of hypoglycaemia such as 

tremor 
   Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Nifedipine Enhanced hypotensive effect; possibly severe hypotension 
  and heart failure 
   Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Pilocarpine Increased risk of arrhythmias 
 * Procainamide Increased myocardial depression 
 * Quinidine Increased myocardial depression 
   Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
   Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect 
 * Verapamil Asystole, severe hypotension, and heart failure 
Trimethoprim 
 * Azathioprine Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
 * Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; plasma ciclosporin 
  concentration possibly reduced by intravenous 

trimethoprim 
   Dapsone Plasma concentration of both dapsone and trimethoprim 

may increase with concomitant use 
   Digoxin Plasma concentration of digoxin possibly increased 
   Glibenclamide Effects of glibenclamide rarely enhanced 
 * Mercaptopurine Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
 * Methotrexate Antifolate effect of methotrexate increased (avoid 
  concomitant use) 
 * Phenytoin Antifolate effect and plasma phenytoin concentration 
  increased 
   Procainamide Increased plasma procainamide concentration 
 * Pyrimethamine Increased antifolate effect 
 * Sulfadoxine +  Increased antifolate effect 
    pyrimethamine 
   Warfarin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
Vaccine, Influenza 
   Dexamethasone High doses of dexamethasone impair immune response 
   Hydrocortisone High doses of hydrocortisone impair immune response 
   Phenytoin Enhanced effect of phenytoin 
   Prednisolone High doses of prednisolone impair immune response 
   Warfarin Effect of warfarin occasionally enhanced 
Vaccine, Live 
   NOTE. Vaccine, Live includes BCG, Cholera (oral), Measles, MMR, Poliomyelitis (oral), 

Rubella, Typhoid, Varicella, and Yellow fever vaccines. 
 

   Asparaginase Avoid use of live vaccines with asparaginase (impairment of 
immune response) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 575 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

 * Azathioprine Avoid use of live vaccines with azathioprine (impairment of 
  immune response) 
   Bleomycin Avoid use of live vaccines with bleomycin (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Chlorambucil Avoid use of live vaccines with chlorambucil (impairment 

of immune response) 
 * Ciclosporin Avoid use of live vaccines with ciclosporin (impairment of 
  immune response) 
   Cisplatin Avoid use of live vaccines with cisplatin (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Cyclophosphamide Avoid use of live vaccines with cyclophosphamide 

(impairment of immune response) 
   Cytarabine Avoid use of live vaccines with cytarabine (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Dacarbazine Avoid use of live vaccines with dacarbazine (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Dactinomycin Avoid use of live vaccines with dactinomycin (impairment 

of immune response) 
   Daunorubicin Avoid use of live vaccines with daunorubicin (impairment 

of immune response) 
 * Dexamethasone High doses of dexamethasone impair immune response; 
  avoid use of live vaccines with dexamethasone 
   Doxorubicin Avoid use of live vaccines with doxorubicin (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Etoposide Avoid use of live vaccines with etoposide (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Fluorouracil Avoid use of live vaccines with fluorouracil (impairment of 

immune response) 
 * Hydrocortisone High doses of hydrocortisone impair immune response; 
  avoid use of live vaccines with hydrocortisone 
 * Immunoglobulin Avoid use of live virus vaccine during 4 weeks before or 
    (human), Anti-D during 3 months after injection of anti-D immunoglobulin 

(impairment of immune response) but rubella vaccine 
(either as MMR or single antigen rubella vaccine) may be 
given at the same time as anti-D immunoglobulin 

 Immunoglobulin,  Avoid use of live vaccine during 3 weeks before or during 
  Human normal 3 months after injection of human normal immunoglobulin 

(impairment of immune response) 
   Mercaptopurine Avoid use of live vaccines with mercaptopurine 

(impairment of immune response) 
   Methotrexate Avoid use of live vaccines with methotrexate (impairment 

of immune response) 
 * Prednisolone High doses of prednisolone impair immune response; avoid 
  use of live vaccines with prednisolone 
   Procarbazine Avoid use of live vaccines with procarbazine (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Vinblastine Avoid use of live vaccines with vinblastine (impairment of 

immune response) 
   Vincristine Avoid use of live vaccines with vincristine (impairment of 

immune response) 
Valproic acid 
   Acetylsalicylic acid Enhancement of effect of valproic acid 
 * Amitriptyline Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 

576 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

   Carbamazepine May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of valproic acid 
reduced; plasma concentration of active metabolite of 
carbamazepine increased 

 * Chloroquine Possibly increased risk of convulsions 
 * Chlorpromazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Clomipramine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
   Erythromycin Metabolism of valproic acid possibly inhibited (increased 

plasma concentration) 
   Ethosuximide May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of ethosuximide 
possibly increased 

 * Fluphenazine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Haloperidol Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect (convulsive threshold 
  lowered) 
 * Mefloquine Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect 
   Phenobarbital May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 

antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of valproic acid 
reduced; phenobarbital concentration increased 

   Phenytoin May be enhanced toxicity without corresponding increase in 
antiepileptic effect; plasma concentration of valproic acid 
reduced; plasma concentration of phenytoin increased or 
possibly reduced 

   Warfarin Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
   Zidovudine Plasma concentration of zidovudine possibly increased (risk 

of toxicity) 
Vancomycin 
  Amikacin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Amphotericin B Possibly increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Capreomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Ciclosporin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
  Cisplatin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly of ototoxicity 
  Furosemide Increased risk of ototoxicity 
  Gentamicin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
  Halothane Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
   Ketamine Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
   Nitrous oxide Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
 Paromomycin Increased risk of ototoxicity 
 Streptomycin Increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity 
* Suxamethonium Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
  Thiopental Hypersensitivity-like reactions can occur with concomitant 

intravenous vancomycin 
Vecuronium 
* Amikacin Enhanced effects of vecuronium 
  Carbamazepine Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (recovery from 

neuromuscular blockade accelerated) 
* Clindamycin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 577 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

* Gentamicin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Halothane Enhanced effects of vecuronium 
  Lithium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Magnesium (parenteral) Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Neostigmine Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
  Nifedipine Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Phenytoin Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect (accelerated recovery 

from neuromuscular blockade) 
* Procainamide Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Propranolol Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Pyridostigmine Antagonism of muscle relaxant effect 
* Quinidine Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
* Streptomycin Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Verapamil Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Verapamil 
  Acetazolamide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Alcohol Enhanced hypotensive effect; plasma concentration of 

alcohol possibly increased by verapamil 
  Alcuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
  Amiloride Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Amitriptyline Possibly increased plasma concentration of amitriptyline 
* Atenolol Asystole, severe hypotension, and heart failure 
* Carbamazepine Enhanced effect of carbamazepine 
  Chlorpromazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Ciclosporin Increased plasma ciclosporin concentration 
  Clomipramine Possibly increased plasma concentration of clomipramine 
  Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of hypotensive effect by estrogens 
  Dexamethasone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Diazepam Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Digoxin Increased plasma concentration of digoxin; increased AV 

block and bradycardia 
  Enalapril Enhanced hypotensive effect 
*  Erythromycin Possible inhibition of metabolism of verapamil (increased 

risk of toxicity) 
  Fluphenazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Furosemide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Glyceryl trinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Grapefruit juice Increased plasma verapamil concentration 
  Haloperidol Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Halothane Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
  Hydralazine Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrochlorothiazide Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Hydrocortisone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Ibuprofen Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
  Isosorbide dinitrate Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Ketamine Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
  Levodopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Lidocaine Increased risk of myocardial depression (interaction less 

likely when lidocaine used topically) 
  Lithium Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma lithium 

concentration 
  Mefloquine Possibly increased risk of bradycardia 
  Methyldopa Enhanced hypotensive effect 
* Nitrous oxide Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 

578 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

* Phenobarbital Effect of verapamil probably reduced 
  Phenytoin Reduced effect of verapamil 
  Prednisolone Antagonism of hypotensive effect 
* Propranolol Asystole, severe hypotension and heart failure 
* Quinidine Increased plasma quinidine concentration (extreme 

hypotension may occur) 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of verapamil (plasma concentration 

significantly reduced) 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
* Simvastatin Increased risk of myopathy 
  Sodium nitroprusside Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Spironolactone Enhanced hypotensive effect 
  Suxamethonium Enhanced effects of suxamethonium 
* Thiopental Enhanced hypotensive effect and AV delay 
* Timolol Asystole, severe hypotension, and heart failure 
  Vecuronium Enhanced muscle relaxant effect 
Vinblastine 
* Bleomycin Increased risk of cardiovascular toxicity 
* Erythromycin Increased toxicity of vinblastine (avoid concomitant use) 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with vinblastine (impairment of 

immune response) 
Vincristine 
  Nifedipine Possibly reduced metabolism of vincristine 
  Phenytoin Possibly reduced absorption of phenytoin 
  Vaccine, Live Avoid use of live vaccines with vincristine (impairment of 

immune response) 
Vitamin D 
  see Ergocalciferol  
Warfarin 
   NOTE. Major changes in the diet (especially involving salads and vegetables) and in 

alcohol consumption may affect anticoagulant control. 
 

* Acetylsalicylic acid Increased risk of bleeding due to antiplatelet effect 
*  Alcohol Enhanced anticoagulant effect with large amounts of 

alcohol; major changes in alcohol consumption may affect 
anticoagulant control 

  Allopurinol Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
* Amitriptyline Enhanced or reduced anticoagulant effect 
  Amoxicillin Studies have failed to demonstrate an interaction, but 

common experience in anticoagulant clinics is that INR 
can be altered by a course of amoxicillin 

  Ampicillin Studies have failed to demonstrate an interaction, but 
common experience in anticoagulant clinics is that INR 
can be altered by a course of ampicillin 

* Azathioprine Anticoagulant effect possibly reduced 
* Azithromycin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect of warfarin 
* Carbamazepine Accelerated metabolism of warfarin (reduced anticoagulant 

effect) 
* Cefazolin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Cefixime Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Ceftazidime Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Ceftriaxone Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 579 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

* Chloramphenicol Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Ciprofloxacin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Clomipramine Enhanced or reduced anticoagulant effect 
* Contraceptives, Oral Antagonism of anticoagulant effect by estrogens and 

progestogens 
*  Dexamethasone Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced or reduced (high-

dose dexamethasone enhances anticoagulant effect) 
* Doxycycline Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
* Erythromycin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Etoposide Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Fluconazole Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Fluorouracil Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
* Fluoxetine Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
* Glibenclamide Possibly enhanced hypoglycaemic effect and changes to 

anticoagulant effect 
* Griseofulvin Reduced anticoagulant effect 
*  Hydrocortisone Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced or reduced (high-

dose hydrocortisone enhances anticoagulant effect) 
* Ibuprofen Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
* Levamisole Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
  Levofloxacin Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Levonorgestrel Antagonism of anticoagulant effect 
* Levothyroxine Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Medroxyprogesterone Antagonism of anticoagulant effect 
* Mercaptopurine Anticoagulant effect possibly reduced 
* Metronidazole Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Miconazole Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Nevirapine Enhanced or reduced anticoagulant effect 
* Norethisterone Antagonism of anticoagulant effect 
* Ofloxacin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
  Paracetamol Prolonged regular use of paracetamol possibly enhances 

anticoagulant effect 
* Phenobarbital Metabolism of warfarin accelerated (reduced anticoagulant 

effect) 
* Phenytoin Accelerated metabolism of warfarin (possibility of reduced 

anticoagulant effect, but enhancement also reported) 
* Phytomenadione Antagonism of anticoagulant effect  
* Prednisolone Anticoagulant effect enhanced or reduced (high-dose 

prednisolone enhances anticoagulant effect) 
  Proguanil Isolated reports of enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Quinidine Anticoagulant effect may be enhanced 
* Rifampicin Accelerated metabolism of warfarin (reduced anticoagulant 

effect) 
* Ritonavir Plasma concentration possibly increased by ritonavir 
  Saquinavir Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Silver sulfadiazine Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Simvastatin Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Sulfadiazine Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
*  Sulfadoxine +  Enhanced anticoagulant effect 

  pyrimethamine 
*  Sulfamethoxazole +  Enhanced anticoagulant effect 

  trimethoprim 
* Tamoxifen Enhanced anticoagulant effect 
* Testosterone Enhanced anticoagulant effect 

580 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 1: Interactions 

  Trimethoprim Possibly enhanced anticoagulant effect 
  Vaccine, Influenza Effect of warfarin occasionally enhanced 
  Valproic acid Anticoagulant effect possibly enhanced 
Yellow fever vaccine 
  see Vaccine, live  
Zidovudine 
  NOTE. Increased risk of toxicity with nephrotoxic and myelosuppressive drugs. 

 
*  Fluconazole Increased plasma concentration of zidovudine (increased 

risk of toxicity) 
  Ibuprofen Increased risk of haematological toxicity 
  Methadone Possibly increased plasma concentration of zidovudine 
  Phenytoin Plasma phenytoin concentration increased or decreased by 

zidovudine 
  Pyrimethamine Increased antifolate effect 
* Ribavirin Possibly inhibited effect of zidovudine 
 Rifampicin Manufacturer of zidovudine advises avoid concomitant use 
* Stavudine May inhibit effect of stavudine (avoid concomitant use) 
  Valproic acid Plasma concentration of zidovudine possibly increased (risk 

of toxicity) 
Zinc sulfate 
  Calcium salts Reduced absorption of zinc sulfate 
  Ciprofloxacin Reduced absorption of ciprofloxacin 
  Ferrous salts Absorption of zinc and of oral ferrous salts reduced 
  Levofloxacin Reduced absorption of levofloxacin 
  Ofloxacin Reduced absorption of ofloxacin 
  Penicillamine Absorption of both drugs reduced 
 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 581 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

 
Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

During pregnancy the mother and the fetus form a non-separable functional 
unit. Maternal well-being is an absolute prerequisite for the optimal 
functioning and development of both parts of this unit. Consequently, it is 
important to treat the mother whenever needed while protecting the unborn 
child to the greatest possible extent.   
Drugs can have harmful effects on the fetus at any time during pregnancy. It is 
important to remember this when prescribing for a woman of childbearing age 
or for a man trying to father a child. However, irrational fear of using drugs 
during pregnancy can also result in harm. Untreated illness, impaired maternal 
compliance, suboptimal treatment, and treatment failures may all impose risk 
to maternal well-being, and may also affect the unborn child. It is important to 
know the “background risk” in the context of the prevalence of drug-induced 
adverse pregnancy outcomes. Major congenital malformations occur in 2–4% 
of all live births. Up to 15% of all diagnosed pregnancies will result in fetal loss. 
The cause of these adverse pregnancy outcomes is understood in only a 
minority of cases.    
During the first trimester drugs may produce congenital malformations 
(teratogenesis), and the greater risk is from the third to the eleventh week of 
pregnancy. During the second and third trimester drugs may affect the growth and 
functional development of the fetus or have toxic effects on fetal tissues. 
Drugs given shortly before term or during labour may have adverse effects on 
labour or on the neonate after delivery. Few drugs have been shown 
conclusively to be teratogenic in man but no drug is safe beyond all doubt in 
early pregnancy. Screening procedures are available where there is a known 
risk of certain defects.  

Prescribing in pregnancy  
If possible, counselling of women before a planned pregnancy should be 
carried out, including discussion of risks associated with specific therapeutic 
agents, traditional medicines, and abuse of substances such as nicotine and 
alcohol. Folic acid supplements should be given during pregnancy planning 
because periconceptual use of folic acid reduces neural tube defects.   
Drugs should be prescribed in pregnancy only if the expected benefits to the 
mother are thought to be greater than the risk to the fetus. All drugs should be 
avoided if possible during the first trimester. Drugs which have been used 
extensively in pregnancy and appear to be usually safe should be prescribed in 
preference to new or untried drugs and the smallest effective dose should be 

582 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

used. Well known single component drugs should usually be preferred to 
multi-component drugs.   
The following table lists drugs which may have harmful effects in pregnancy 
and indicates the trimester of risk. It is based on human data but information 
on animal studies has been included for some drugs when its omission might 
be misleading.  
Absence of a medicine from the list does not imply safety 
 

Medicine Comment 

Abacavir Toxicity in animal studies; see section 6.4.2 

Acetazolamide Not used to treat hypertension in pregnancy 
First trimester: Avoid (toxicity in animal studies) 

Acetylsalicylic acid Third trimester: Impaired platelet function and risk 
of haemorrhage; delayed onset and increased 
duration of labour with increased blood loss; avoid 
analgesic doses if possible in last few weeks (low 
doses probably not harmful); with high doses, 
closure of fetal ductus arteriosus in utero and 
possibly persistent pulmonary hypertension in the 
newborn; kernicterus in jaundiced neonates 

Aciclovir Not known to be harmful; limited absorption from 
topical preparations 

Albendazole Contraindicated in cestode infections; see 
section 6.1.1 
First trimester: avoid in nematode infections; see 
section 6.1.1 

Alcohol First, and second trimesters: Regular daily drinking is 
teratogenic (fetal alcohol syndrome) and may cause 
growth retardation; occasional single drinks are 
probably safe 
Third trimester: Withdrawal may occur in babies of 
alcoholic mothers 

Alcuronium Does not cross placenta in significant amounts; use 
only if potential benefit outweighs risk 

Allopurinol Toxicity not reported; use only if no safer alternative 
and disease carries risk for mother or child 

Amiloride Not used to treat hypertension in pregnancy 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 583 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Amitriptyline Manufacturer advises avoid unless essential, 
particularly during first and third trimesters 

Amlodipine No information on use in humans; risk to fetus 
should be balanced against risk of uncontrolled 
maternal hypertension 

Amodiaquine Use only if no safer alternative 

Amoxicillin Not known to be harmful 

Amoxicillin +  See Amoxicillin 
  clavulanic acid 

Amphotericin B Not known to be harmful but use only if potential 
benefit outweighs risk 

Ampicillin Not known to be harmful 

Artemether First trimester: Avoid 

Artemether + See Artemether 
  lumefantrine 

Artesunate First trimester: Avoid 

Asparaginase Avoid; see section 8.2 

Atenolol May cause intrauterine growth restriction, neonatal 
hypoglycaemia, and bradycardia; risk greater in 
severe hypertension; see section 12.3 

Atropine Not known to be harmful 

Azathioprine Transplant patients should not discontinue 
azathioprine on becoming pregnant; use in 
pregnancy should be carefully supervised; there is no 
evidence that azathioprine is teratogenic but 
premature birth and low birth weight and 
spontaneous abortion reported following maternal or 
paternal exposure 

Azithromycin Limited information available; use only if adequate 
alternatives not available 

Beclometasone Benefit of treatment, for example in asthma, 
outweighs risk 

Benzathine  Not known to be harmful 
  benzylpenicillin 

584 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Benznidazole First trimester: avoid 

Benzylpenicillin Not known to be harmful 

Betamethasone Benefit of treatment, for example in asthma, 
outweighs risk 

Bleomycin Avoid (teratogenic and carcinogenic in animal 
studies); see section 8.2 

Bupivacaine Third trimester: With large doses, neonatal 
respiratory depression, hypotonia, and bradycardia 
after paracervical or epidural block; lower doses of 
bupivacaine for intrathecal use during late pregnancy 

Calcium folinate Manufacturer advises use only if potential benefit 
outweighs risk 

Carbamazepine First trimester: Risk of teratogenesis including 
increased risk of neural tube defects (counselling and 
screening and adequate folate supplements advised, 
for example, 5 mg daily); risk of teratogenicity greater 
if more than one antiepileptic used; see section 5 
Third trimester: May possibly cause vitamin K 
deficiency and risk of neonatal bleeding; if vitamin K 
not given at birth, neonate should be monitored 
closely for signs of bleeding 

Cefazolin Not known to be harmful 

Cefixime Not known to be harmful 

Ceftazidime Not known to be harmful 

Ceftriaxone Not known to be harmful 

Chlorambucil Avoid; use effective contraception during 
administration to men or women; see section 8.2 

Chloramphenicol Third trimester: Neonatal “grey” syndrome 

Chloroquine First and third trimesters: Benefit of prophylaxis and 
treatment in malaria outweighs risk; important: see 
section 6.5.3 

Chlorphenamine No evidence of teratogenicity 

Chlorpromazine Third trimester: Extrapyramidal effects in neonate 
occasionally reported 

 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 585 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Ciclosporin There is less experience of ciclosporin in pregnancy 
but it does not appear to be any more harmful than 
azathioprine; use in pregnancy should be supervised 
in specialist units 

Ciprofloxacin Avoid (arthropathy in animal studies); safer 
alternatives available 

Cisplatin Avoid (teratogenic and toxic in animal studies); see 
section 8.2 

Clindamycin Not known to be harmful 

Clomifene Possible effects on fetal development 

Clomipramine Manufacturer advises avoid unless essential, 
particularly during first and third trimesters 

Cloxacillin Not known to be harmful 

Codeine Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration; 
withdrawal effects in neonates of dependent mothers; 
gastric stasis and risk of inhalation pneumonia in 
mother during labour 

Contraceptives, Oral Epidemiological evidence suggests no harmful effects 
on fetus 

Cyclophosphamide Avoid; use effective contraception during and for at 
least 3 months after administration to men or women; 
see section 8.2 

Cytarabine Avoid (teratogenic in animal studies); see section 8.2 

Dacarbazine Avoid (carcinogenic and teratogenic in animal 
studies); use effective contraception during and for at 
least 6 months after administration to men or women; 
see section 8.2 

Dactinomycin Avoid (teratogenic in animal studies); see section 8.2 

Dapsone Third trimester: Neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia; folic acid, 5 mg daily, should 
be given to mother 

Daunorubicin Avoid (teratogenic and carcinogenic in animal 
studies); see section 8.2 

Deferoxamine Teratogenic in animal studies; manufacturer advises 
use only if potential benefit outweighs risk 

586 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Dexamethasone Benefit of treatment, for example in asthma, 
outweighs risk; risk of intrauterine growth retardation 
on prolonged or repeated systemic treatment; 
corticosteroid cover required by mother during 
labour; monitor closely if fluid retention 

Diazepam Avoid regular use (risk of neonatal withdrawal 
symptoms); use only if clear indication such as seizure 
control (high doses during late pregnancy or labour 
may cause neonatal hypothermia, hypotonia, and 
respiratory depression) 

Didanosine Avoid if possible in first trimester; increased risk of 
lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis; see section 6.4.2.1 

Diethylcarbamazine Avoid: Delay treatment until after delivery 

Digoxin May need dosage adjustment 

Diloxanide Defer treatment until after first trimester 

Doxorubicin Avoid (teratogenic and toxic in animal studies); with 
liposomal product use effective contraception during 
and for at least 6 months after administration to men 
or women; see section 8.2 

Doxycycline First trimester: Effects on skeletal development in 
animal studies 
Second and third trimesters: Dental discoloration; 
maternal hepatotoxicity with large doses 

Efavirenz Avoid (potential teratogenic effects); see 
section 6.4.2.2 

Eflornithine Avoid 

Emtricitabine No information available; use only if essential; see 
section 6.4.2.1 

Enalapril Avoid; may adversely affect fetal and neonatal blood 
pressure control and renal function; also possible 
skull defects and oligohydramnios; toxicity in animal 
studies 

Ephedrine Increased fetal heart rate reported with parenteral 
ephedrine 

Ergocalciferol High doses teratogenic in animals but therapeutic 
doses unlikely to be harmful 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 587 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Erythromycin Not known to be harmful 

Estradiol cypionate Epidemiological evidence suggests no harmful effects 
on fetus; see Contraceptives, Oral 

Ethambutol Not known to be harmful 

Ethinylestradiol Epidemiological evidence suggests no harmful effects 
on fetus 

Ethosuximide First trimester: May possibly be teratogenic; risk of 
teratogenicity greater if more than one antiepileptic 
used; see section 5 

Etoposide Avoid (teratogenic in animal studies); see section 8.2 

Fluconazole Avoid (multiple congenital abnormalities reported 
with long-term high doses) 

Flucytosine Teratogenic in animal studies; manufacturer advises 
use only if potential benefit outweighs risk 

Fluorouracil Avoid (teratogenic); see section 8.2 

Fluoxetine Manufacturer advises use only if potential benefit 
outweighs risk; risk of neonatal withdrawal 

Fluphenazine Third trimester: Extrapyramidal effects in neonate 
occasionally reported 

Furosemide Not used to treat hypertension in pregnancy 

Gentamicin Second and third trimesters: Auditory or vestibular 
nerve damage; risk probably very small with 
gentamicin, but avoid unless essential (if given, serum 
gentamicin concentration monitoring essential) 

Glibenclamide Third trimester: Neonatal hypoglycaemia; insulin is 
normally substituted in all diabetics; if oral drugs are 
used, therapy should be stopped at least 2 days before 
delivery 

Griseofulvin Avoid (fetotoxicity and teratogenicity in animals); use 
effective contraception during and for at least 
1 month after administration (important: 
effectiveness of oral contraceptives reduced; see 
Appendix 1); also men should avoid fathering a child 
during and for at least 6 months after administration 
 

588 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Haloperidol Third trimester: Extrapyramidal effects in neonate 
occasionally reported 

Halothane Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration 

Heparin Maternal osteoporosis has been reported after 
prolonged use; multidose vials may contain benzyl 
alcohol; some manufacturers advise avoid 

Hydralazine Avoid during first and second trimesters; no reports 
of serious harm following use in third trimester 

Hydrochlorothiazide Not used to treat hypertension in pregnancy 
Third trimester: May cause neonatal 
thrombocytopenia 

Hydrocortisone Benefit of treatment, for example in asthma, 
outweighs risk; risk of intrauterine growth retardation 
on prolonged or repeated systemic treatment; 
corticosteroid cover required by mother during 
labour; monitor closely if fluid retention 

Ibuprofen Avoid unless potential benefit outweighs risk 
Third trimester: With regular use closure of fetal 
ductus arteriosus in utero and possibly persistent 
pulmonary hypertension in the newborn; delayed 
onset and increased duration of labour 

Imipenem + Use only if potential benefit outweighs risk (toxicity 
  cilastatin in animal studies) 

Indinavir Avoid if possible in first trimester; theoretical risk of 
hyperbilirubinaemia and renal stones in neonates if 
used at term; see section 6.4.2.3 

Insulins Insulin requirements should be assessed frequently by 
an experienced diabetes clinician 

Iodine Second and third trimesters: Neonatal goitre and 
hypothyroidism 

Ipratropium bromide Not known to be harmful 

Isoniazid Not known to be harmful 

Ivermectin Delay treatment until after delivery; see section 6.1.2 

Ketamine Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 589 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Lamivudine Avoid if possible in first trimester; benefit of 
treatment considered to outweigh risk in second and 
third trimesters; see section 6.4.2.1 

Levamisole Third trimester: Avoid 

Levodopa + carbidopa Toxicity in animal studies 

Levonorgestrel In oral contraceptives, epidemiological evidence 
suggests no harmful effects on fetus 

Levothyroxine Monitor maternal serum thyrotrophin concentration; 
levothyroxine may cross the placenta and excessive 
dosage can be detrimental to fetus 

Lidocaine Third trimester: With large doses, neonatal respiratory 
depression, hypotonia, and bradycardia after 
paracervical or epidural block 

Lithium First trimester: Avoid if possible (risk of 
teratogenicity including cardiac abnormalities) 
Second and third trimesters: Dose requirements 
increased (but on delivery return to normal abruptly); 
close monitoring of serum lithium concentration 
advised (risk of toxicity in neonate) 

Lopinavir + ritonavir Avoid if possible in first trimester; avoid oral solution 
due to high propylene glycol content; see 
section 6.4.2.3 

Magnesium sulfate Third trimester: not known to be harmful for short-
term intravenous administration in eclampsia but 
excessive doses may cause neonatal respiratory 
depression 

Mebendazole Toxicity in animal studies. 
Contraindicated in cestode infections; see section 6.1.1 
First trimester: Avoid in nematode infections; see 
section 6.1.1 

Medroxyprogesterone Avoid (genital malformations and cardiac defects 
  acetate reported in male and female fetuses); inadvertent use 

of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate contraceptive 
injection in pregnancy unlikely to harm fetus 

Mefloquine Use only if other antimalarials inappropriate, see 
section 6.5.3 

590 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Melarsoprol Avoid 

Mercaptopurine Avoid (teratogenic); see section 8.2 

Metformin All trimesters: Avoid; insulin is normally substituted 
in all diabetics 

Methadone Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration; 
withdrawal effects in neonates of dependent mothers; 
gastric stasis and risk of inhalation pneumonia in 
mother during labour 

Methotrexate Avoid (teratogenic); fertility may be reduced during 
therapy but this may be reversible; use effective 
contraception during and for at least 6 months after 
administration to men or women; see section 8.2 

Methyldopa Not known to be harmful 

Metoclopramide Not known to be harmful 

Metronidazole Avoid high-dose regimens 

Mifepristone If treatment fails, pregnancy must be terminated by 
another method 

Misoprostol Potent uterine stimulant; may be teratogenic; if 
medical abortion fails, pregnancy must be terminated 
by another method 

Morphine Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration; 
withdrawal effects in neonates of dependent mothers; 
gastric stasis and risk of inhalation pneumonia in 
mother during labour 

Naloxone Use only if potential benefit outweighs risk 

Nelfinavir Avoid if possible in first trimester; potential benefit 
of treatment considered to outweigh risk in second 
and third trimesters; see section 6.4.2.3 

Neostigmine Third trimester: Neonatal myasthenia with large doses 

Nevirapine Avoid if possible in first trimester; benefit of 
treatment considered to outweigh risk in second and 
third trimesters; see section 6.4.2.2 

Niclosamide T. solium infections in pregnancy should be treated 
immediately; see section 6.1.1 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 591 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Nifedipine Some dihydropyridines are teratogenic in animals, but 
risk to fetus should be balanced against risk of 
uncontrolled maternal hypertension; may inhibit 
labour (used for premature labour) 

Nifurtimox First trimester: Avoid 

Nitrofurantoin Third trimester: May produce neonatal haemolysis if 
used at term 

Nitrous oxide Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration 

Norethisterone In oral contraceptives, epidemiological evidence 
suggests no harmful effects on fetus; in higher doses 
masculinization of female fetuses and other defects 
reported 

Nystatin No information available, but absorption from 
gastrointestinal tract negligible 

Ofloxacin Avoid (arthropathy in animal studies); safer 
alternatives available 

Oxamniquine If immediate treatment not required, schistosomiasis 
treatment should be delayed until after delivery; see 
section 6.1.3 

Paracetamol Not known to be harmful 

Paromomycin Second and third trimesters: Auditory or vestibular 
nerve damage possible; no information on use in 
humans 

Penicillamine Fetal abnormalities reported rarely; avoid if possible 

Pentamidine isetionate Potentially fatal visceral leishmaniasis must be treated 
without delay; should not be withheld in 
trypanosomiasis even if evidence of meningo-
encephalitic involvement; potentially fatal P. carinii  
(P. jiroveci) pneumonia must be treated without delay 

Pentavalent antimony Potentially fatal visceral leishmaniasis must be treated 
  compounds without delay 

 
 
 
 

592 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Phenobarbital First and third trimesters: Congenital malformations 
— risk of teratogenicity greater if more than one 
antiepileptic used; may possibly cause vitamin K 
deficiency and risk of neonatal bleeding; if vitamin K 
not given at birth, neonate should be monitored 
closely for signs of bleeding; see section 5 

Phenoxymethylpenicillin Not known to be harmful 

Phenytoin First and third trimesters: Congenital malformations 
(screening advised); adequate folate supplements 
should be given to mother (for example, folic acid 
5 mg daily); risk of teratogenicity greater if more than 
one antiepileptic used; may possibly cause vitamin K 
deficiency and risk of neonatal bleeding; if vitamin K 
not given at birth, neonate should be monitored 
closely for signs of bleeding 
NOTE. Caution in interpreting plasma phenytoin 
concentrations — bound phenytoin may be reduced 
but free (or effective) phenytoin unchanged; see 
section 5 

Phytomenadione No specific information available; use only if 
potential benefit outweighs risk 

Podophyllum resin Avoid; neonatal death and teratogenesis have been 
reported 

Polyvidone iodine Second and third trimesters: Sufficient iodine may be 
absorbed to affect the fetal thyroid 

Potassium iodide Second and third trimesters: Neonatal goitre and 
hypothyroidism 

Praziquantel T. solium infections in pregnancy should be treated 
immediately; see section 6.1.1; benefit of treatment in 
schistosomiasis outweighs risk; see section 6.1.3; if 
immediate treatment not considered essential for 
fluke infections, treatment should be delayed until 
after delivery; see section 6.1.3 

Prednisolone Benefit of treatment, for example in asthma, 
outweighs risk; risk of intrauterine growth retardation 
on prolonged or repeated systemic treatment; 
corticosteroid cover required by mother during 
labour; monitor closely if fluid retention 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 593 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Primaquine Third trimester: Neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia; delay treatment until after 
delivery 

Procarbazine Avoid (teratogenic in animal studies and isolated 
reports in humans); see section 8.2 

Proguanil Benefit of prophylaxis and of treatment outweighs 
risk; adequate folate supplements should be given to 
mother 

Promethazine No evidence of teratogenicity 

Propranolol May cause intrauterine growth restriction, neonatal 
hypoglycaemia, and bradycardia; risk greater in severe 
hypertension; see section 12.3 

Propylthiouracil Second and third trimesters: Neonatal goitre and 
hypothyroidism 

Pyrazinamide Use only if potential benefit outweighs risk 

Pyridostigmine Third trimester: Neonatal myasthenia with large doses 

Pyrimethamine First trimester: Theoretical teratogenic risk (folate 
antagonist); adequate folate supplements should be 
given to the mother; avoid in pneumocystosis and 
toxoplasmosis; see Sulfadiazine 

Quinidine Not known to be harmful at therapeutic doses 

Quinine First trimester: High doses are teratogenic; but in 
malaria benefit of treatment outweighs risk 

Ranitidine Not known to be harmful 

Retinol First trimester: Excessive doses may be teratogenic; 
see section 27  

Ribavirin Avoid (teratogenic); use effective contraception 
during and for at least 7 months after administration 
to men or women; see section 6.4.3 

Rifampicin First trimester: Very high doses teratogenic in animal 
studies 
Third trimester: Risk of neonatal bleeding may be 
increased 

Ritonavir See Lopinavir + ritonavir 
 

594 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Salbutamol Appropriate to use for asthma; high doses should be 
given by inhalation only — parenteral use can affect 
the myometrium and possibly cause cardiac problems 

Saquinavir Avoid if possible in first trimester; potential benefit 
of treatment considered to outweigh risk in second 
and third trimesters; see section 6.4.2.3 

Silver sulfadiazine Third trimester: Neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia; fear of increased risk of 
kernicterus in neonates appears to be unfounded 

Simvastatin Avoid — congenital anomalies reported; decreased 
synthesis of cholesterol possibly affects fetal 
development 

Sodium nitroprusside Potential for accumulation of cyanide in fetus — 
avoid prolonged use 

Sodium valproate see Valproic acid 

Spironolactone Toxicity in animal studies 

Stavudine Avoid if possible in first trimester; increased risk of 
lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis; see section 6.4.2.1  

Streptokinase Possibility of premature separation of placenta in first 
18 weeks; theoretical possibility of fetal haemorrhage 
throughout pregnancy; risk of maternal haemorrhage 
on postpartum use 

Streptomycin Second and third trimesters: Auditory or vestibular 
nerve damage; avoid unless essential (if given, serum 
streptomycin concentration monitoring essential) 

Sulfadiazine Third trimester: Neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia; fear of increased risk of 
kernicterus in neonates appears to be unfounded 
In toxoplasmosis, avoid in first trimester, but may be 
given in second and third trimester if danger of 
congenital transmission 

Sulfadoxine +  In malaria, benefit of prophylaxis and treatment 
  pyrimethamine outweigh risk 

First trimester: possible teratogenic risk 
(pyrimethamine is a folate antagonist) 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 595 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Third trimester: Neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia; fear of increased risk of 
kernicterus in neonates appears to be unfounded;  
see section 6.5.3.1 

Sulfamethoxazole + First trimester: Teratogenic risk (trimethoprim is a 
  trimethoprim folate antagonist) 

Third trimester: Neonatal haemolysis and 
methaemoglobinaemia; fear of increased risk of 
kernicterus in neonates appears to be unfounded 

Sulfasalazine Third trimester: Theoretical risk of neonatal 
haemolysis; adequate folate supplements should be 
given to mother 

Suramin sodium In onchocerciasis, delay treatment until after delivery; 
in T. brucei rhodesiense, treatment should be given even 
if evidence of meningoencephalopathic involvement 

Suxamethonium Mildly prolonged maternal paralysis may occur 

Tamoxifen Avoid (possible effects on fetal development); use 
effective contraception during treatment and for at 
least 2 months after administration to women 

Tenofovir No information available; use only if potential benefit 
outweighs risk; see section 6.4.2.1 

Testosterone Masculinization of female fetus 

Tetracycline First trimester: Effects on skeletal development in 
animal studies 
Second and third trimesters: Dental discoloration; 
maternal hepatotoxicity with large doses 

Thiopental Third trimester: Depresses neonatal respiration; dose 
should not exceed 250 mg 

Trimethoprim First trimester: Teratogenic risk (folate antagonist) 

Vaccine, BCG First trimester: Theoretical risk of congenital 
malformations, but need for vaccination may 
outweigh possible risk to fetus; see section 19.3  

Vaccine, Influenza Not known to be harmful 
 
 

596 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Vaccine, Measles First trimester: Theoretical risk of congenital 
malformations, but need for vaccination may 
outweigh possible risk to fetus; see section 19.3; avoid 
MMR 

Vaccine, MMR Avoid; pregnancy should be avoided for 1 month 
after immunization 

Vaccine, Poliomyelitis, First trimester: Theoretical risk of congenital 
   live malformations, but need for vaccination may 

outweigh possible risk to fetus; see section 19.3  

Vaccine, Rubella Avoid; pregnancy should be avoided for 1 month 
after immunization 

Vaccine, Varicella Avoid; pregnancy should be avoided for 3 months 
after immunization 

Vaccine, Yellow fever First trimester: Theoretical risk of congenital 
malformations, however need for vaccination may 
outweigh possible risk to fetus especially after the 6th 
month of pregnancy; pregnant women should be 
advised not to travel to areas where there is a risk of 
exposure to yellow fever; see section 19.3  

Valproic acid First and third trimesters: Increased risk of congenital 
malformations and developmental delay (counselling 
and screening advised — folic acid supplements may 
reduce risk of neural tube defects); risk of 
teratogenicity greater if more than one antiepileptic 
used; neonatal bleeding (related to hypofibrinaemia) 
and neonatal hepatotoxicity also reported; see 
section 5  

Vancomycin Use only if potential benefit outweighs risk — plasma 
vancomycin concentration monitoring essential to 
reduce risk of fetal toxicity 

Vecuronium No information available; use only if potential benefit 
outweighs risk 

Verapamil May reduce uterine blood flow with fetal hypoxia; 
may inhibit labour 

Vinblastine Avoid (limited experience suggests fetal harm; 
teratogenic in animal studies); see section 8.2 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 597 



Appendix 2: Pregnancy 

Medicine Comment 

Vincristine Avoid (teratogenicity and fetal loss in animal studies); 
see section 8.2 

Warfarin Congenital malformations; fetal and neonatal 
haemorrhage; see section 10.2 

Zidovudine Avoid if possible in first trimester; benefit of 
treatment considered to outweigh risk in second and 
third trimesters; see section 6.4.2.1 

598 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Administration of some drugs (for example, ergotamine) to nursing mothers 
may harm the infant, whereas administration of others (for example, digoxin) 
has little effect. Some drugs inhibit lactation (for example, estrogens).  
Toxicity to the infant can occur if the drug enters the breast milk in 
pharmacologically significant quantities. The concentration in milk of some 
drugs (for example, iodides) may exceed the concentration in the maternal 
plasma so that therapeutic doses in the mother may cause toxicity to the infant. 
Some drugs inhibit the infant’s sucking reflex (for example, phenobarbital). 
Drugs in breast milk may, at least theoretically, cause hypersensitivity in the 
infant even when the concentration is too low for a pharmacological effect.  

The following table lists drugs:  

- which should be used with caution or which are contraindicated in 
breastfeeding for any one of the reasons given above;  

- which, on present evidence, may be given to the mother during 
breastfeeding because they appear in milk in amounts which are too 
small to be harmful to the infant;  

- which are not known to be harmful to the infant although they are 
present in breast milk in significant amounts.  

For many drugs insufficient evidence is available to provide definitive guidance 
and it is advisable to administer only drugs essential to a mother during 
breastfeeding. Because of the inadequacy of information on drugs in breast 
milk, the following table should be used only as a guide; absence from the 
table does not imply safety. 

WHO POLICY. Infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first 6 months 
of life; thereafter they should receive appropriate complementary food and 
continue to be breastfed up to 2 years of age or beyond. 
Advice in the table may differ from that given in other sources, including 
manufacturer’s product literature.  
For further information on use of drugs during breastfeeding, the WHO 
document,  Breastfeeding and maternal medication: Recommendations for drugs in the 
Eleventh WHO Model List of Essential Drugs. (www.who.int/child-adolescent-
health/New_Publications/NUTRITION/BF_Maternal_Medication.pdf). 
  

WHO Model Formulary 2008 599 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicines present in breast milk  

  

Medicine Comment 

Abacavir see section 6.4.2  
Acetazolamide Amount too small to be harmful 
Acetylsalicylic acid Short course safe in usual dosage; monitor infant; 

regular use of high doses could impair platelet 
function and produce hypoprothrombinaemia in 
infant if neonatal vitamin K stores low; possible 
risk of Reye syndrome 

Aciclovir Significant amount in milk after systemic 
administration, but considered safe to use 

Alcohol Large amounts may affect infant and reduce milk 
consumption 

Alcuronium No information available 
Allopurinol Present in milk — not known to be harmful 
Amiloride No information available; manufacturer advises 

avoid  
Amitriptyline Detectable in breast milk; continue breastfeeding; 

adverse effects possible; monitor infant for 
drowsiness 

Amlodipine Presence in milk possible; monitor infant 
Amodiaquine No information available 
Amoxicillin Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 

monitor infant 
Amoxicillin + clavulanic  Trace amounts in milk 
  acid 
Amphotericin B No information available 
Ampicillin Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 

monitor infant 
Artemether + Discontinue breastfeeding during and for 1 week 
  lumefantrine after stopping treatment; present in milk in animal 

studies 
Asparaginase Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Atenolol Significant amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 

monitor infant 
Atropine Small amount present in milk; monitor infant 

600 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Azathioprine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Azithromycin Present in milk; limited information available — 

use only if no suitable alternative 
Beclometasone Systemic effects in infant unlikely with maternal 

dose of less than equivalent of 40 mg prednisolone 
daily; monitor infant’s adrenal function with higher 
doses; the amount of inhaled drug in breast milk is 
probably too small to be harmful 

Benzathine  Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 
  benzylpenicillin monitor infant 
Benzylpenicillin Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 

monitor infant 
Betamethasone Systemic effects in infant unlikely with maternal 

dose of less than equivalent of 40 mg prednisolone 
daily; monitor infant’s adrenal function with higher 
doses 

Bleomycin Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Bupivacaine Amount too small to be harmful 
Carbamazepine Continue breastfeeding; adverse effects possible 

(severe skin reaction reported in one infant); 
monitor infant for drowsiness; see section 5 

Cefazolin Excreted in low concentrations; safe in usual 
dosage; monitor infant 

Cefixime Probably present in milk but safe in usual dosage; 
monitor infant 

Ceftazidime Excreted in low concentrations; safe in usual 
dosage; monitor infant 

Ceftriaxone Excreted in low concentrations; safe in usual 
dosage; monitor infant 

Chlorambucil Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Chloramphenicol Continue breastfeeding; use alternative drug if 

possible; may cause bone marrow toxicity in infant; 
concentration in milk usually insufficient to cause 
“grey syndrome” 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 601 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Chloroquine At doses used for malaria prophylaxis, amount in 
milk probably too small to be harmful and 
inadequate for reliable protection against malaria in 
the breastfead infant; avoid breastfeeding when 
used for rheumatic disease 

Chlorphenamine Safe in usual dosage; monitor infant for drowsiness 
Chlorpromazine Continue breastfeeding; adverse effects possible; 

monitor infant for drowsiness 
Ciclosporin Present in milk—manufacturer advises avoid 
Ciprofloxacin Continue breastfeeding; use alternative drug if 

possible; high concentrations in breast milk 
Cisplatin Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Clindamycin Amount probably too small to be harmful but 

bloody diarrhoea reported in one infant 
Clofazimine Limited information available—can cause 

reversible skin discoloration in nursing infant 
Clomifene May inhibit lactation 
Clomipramine Small amount present in milk; continue 

breastfeeding; adverse effects possible; monitor 
infant for drowsiness 

Cloxacillin Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 
monitor infant 

Codeine Amount too small to be harmful 
Contraceptives, Oral Combined oral contraceptives may inhibit 

lactation—use alternative method of contraception 
until weaning or for 6 months after birth; 
progestogen-only contraceptives do not affect 
lactation (preferably start 6 weeks after birth or 
later) 

Cyclophosphamide Breastfeeding contraindicated during and for 
36 hours after stopping treatment 

Cytarabine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Dacarbazine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Dactinomycin Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Dapsone Although significant amount in milk risk to infant 

very small; continue breastfeeding; monitor infant 
for jaundice 

602 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Daunorubicin Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Deferoxamine No information available; manufacturer advises use 

only if potential benefit outweighs risk 
Dexamethasone Systemic effects in infant unlikely with maternal 

dose of less than equivalent of 40 mg prednisolone 
daily; monitor infant’s adrenal function with higher 
doses 

Diazepam Continue breastfeeding; adverse effects possible; 
monitor infant for drowsiness; see section 5 

Didanosine See section 6.4.2.1  
Digoxin Amount too small to be harmful 
Diloxanide Manufacturer advises avoid 
Dimercaprol Avoid 
Dopamine No information available 
Doxorubicin Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Doxycycline Continue breastfeeding; use alternative drug if 

possible (absorption and therefore discoloration of 
teeth in infant probably usually prevented by 
chelation with calcium in milk) 

Efavirenz See section 6.4.2.2 
Eflornithine Avoid 
Emtricitabine Breastfeeding recommended during first 6 months 

if no safe alternative to breast milk 
Enalapril Amount probably too small to be harmful 
Ephedrine Irritability and disturbed sleep reported 
Ergocalciferol Caution with high doses; may cause hypercalcaemia 

in infant 
Erythromycin Only small amounts in milk—not known to be 

harmful 
Estradiol cypionate Avoid; adverse effects on lactation; see also 

Contraceptives, Oral 
Ethambutol Amount too small to be harmful 
Ethinylestradiol May inhibit lactation; use alternative method of 

contraception; see Contraceptives, Oral 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 603 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Ethosuximide Significant amount in milk; continue breastfeeding; 
adverse effects possible; monitor infant for 
drowsiness; see section 5 

Etoposide Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Fluconazole Present in milk; safe in usual dosage; monitor 

infant 
Flucytosine Manufacturer advises avoid 
Fluorouracil Discontinue breastfeeding 
Fluoxetine Present in milk; manufacturer advises avoid or use 

lowest effective dose 
Fluphenazine Amount excreted in milk probably too small to be 

harmful; continue breastfeeding; adverse effects 
possible; monitor infant for drowsiness 

Furosemide Amount too small to be harmful 
Gentamicin Amount probably too small to be harmful; monitor 

infant for thrush and diarrhoea 
Glibenclamide Theoretical possibility of hypoglycaemia in infant 
Griseofulvin No information available; avoid 
Haloperidol Amount present in milk probably too small to be 

harmful; continue breastfeeding; adverse effects 
possible; monitor infant for drowsiness 

Halothane Present in milk 
Hydralazine Present in milk but not known to be harmful; 

monitor infant 
Hydrochlorothiazide Continue breastfeeding; may inhibit lactation 
Hydrocortisone Systemic effects in infant unlikely with maternal 

dose of less than equivalent of 40 mg prednisolone 
daily; monitor infant’s adrenal function with higher 
doses 

Ibuprofen Amount too small to be harmful; short courses safe 
in usual doses 

Imipenem + cilastatin Present in milk; manufacturer advises avoid 
Indinavir see section 6.4.2.3 
Insulins Amount too small to be harmful 

 
 

604 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Iodine Stop breastfeeding; danger of neonatal 
hypothyroidism or goitre; appears to be 
concentrated in milk 

Isoniazid Monitor infant for possible toxicity; theoretical risk 
of convulsions and neuropathy; prophylactic 
pyridoxine advisable in mother and infant 

Ivermectin Avoid treating mother until infant is 1 week old 
Lamivudine Present in milk; see section 6.4.2.1 
Levamisole Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Levodopa + carbidopa Present in milk; levodopa may inhibit lactation 
Levonorgestrel Combined oral contraceptives may inhibit lactation; 

use alternative method of contraception until 
weaning or for 6 months after birth; progestogen-
only contraceptives do not affect lactation 
(preferably start 6 weeks after birth or later) 

Levothyroxine Amount too small to affect tests for neonatal 
hypothyroidism 

Lidocaine Amount too small to be harmful 
Lithium Present in milk and risk of toxicity in infant; 

continue breastfeeding; monitor infant carefully, 
particularly if risk of dehydration 

Lopinavir + ritonavir See section 6.4.2.3 
Lumefantrine See Artemether + Lumefantrine 
Mebendazole Amount too small to be harmful 
Medroxyprogesterone Present in milk; no adverse effects reported 
  acetate (preferably start injectable contraceptive 6 weeks 

after birth or later) 
Mefloquine Present in milk but risk to infant minimal 
Mercaptopurine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Metformin Present in milk but safe in usual doses; monitor 

infant 
Methadone Withdrawal symptoms in infant; dose should be as 

low as possible and infant monitored to avoid 
sedation 

Methotrexate Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Methyldopa Amount too small to be harmful 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 605 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Methylthioninium No information available; avoid 
  chloride 
Metoclopramide Present in milk; adverse effects possible; monitor 

infant for adverse effects 
Metronidazole Significant amount in milk; continue breastfeeding; 

avoid large doses; use alternative drug if possible 
Mifepristone Avoid breastfeeding for 14 days after 

administration 
Misoprostol No information available; manufacturer advises 

avoid 
Morphine Short courses safe in usual doses; monitor infant 
Naloxone No information available 
Nelfinavir see section 6.4.2.3 
Neostigmine Amount probably too small to be harmful; monitor 

infant 
Nevirapine Present in milk; see section 6.4.2.2 
Nifedipine Small amount in milk; continue breastfeeding; 

monitor infant 
Nitrofurantoin Only small amounts in milk but could be enough to 

produce haemolysis in G6PD-deficient infants 
Norethisterone Combined oral contraceptives may inhibit lactation; 

use alternative method of contraception until 
weaning or for 6 months after birth; progestogen-
only contraceptives do not affect lactation 
(preferably start injectable contraceptive 6 weeks 
after birth or later) 

Nystatin No information available, but absorption from 
gastrointestinal tract negligible 

Ofloxacin Continue breastfeeding; use alternative drug if 
possible 

Oxamniquine No information available, but considered 
preferable to avoid 

Paracetamol Small amount present in milk; short courses safe in 
usual dosage; monitor infant 

Penicillamine No information available; manufacturer advises 
avoid unless potential benefit outweighs risk 

606 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Pentamidine isetionate Manufacturer advises avoid unless essential 
Pentavalent antimony Avoid 
  compounds 
Phenobarbital Continue breastfeeding; adverse effects possible; 

monitor infant for drowsiness; see section 5 
Phenoxymethylpenicillin Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 

monitor infant 
Phenytoin Small amount present in milk; continue 

breastfeeding; adverse effects possible; monitor 
infant for drowsiness; see section 5 

Polyvidone iodine Avoid; iodine absorbed from vaginal preparations 
is concentrated in milk 

Potassium iodide Stop breastfeeding; danger of neonatal 
hypothyroidism or goitre; appears to be 
concentrated in milk 

Praziquantel Avoid breastfeeding during and for 72 hours after 
treatment; considered safe to continue 
breastfeeding during treatment for schistosomiasis 

Prednisolone Systemic effects in infant unlikely with maternal 
dose of less than 40 mg prednisolone daily; 
monitor infant’s adrenal function with higher doses 

Primaquine No information available; risk of haemolysis in 
G6PD-deficient infants 

Procainamide Present in milk; continue breastfeeding; monitor 
infant 

Procaine benzylpenicillin Trace amounts in milk; safe in usual dosage; 
monitor infant 

Procarbazine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Proguanil Amount in milk probably too small to be harmful 

at doses used for malaria prophylaxis but 
inadequate for reliable protection against malaria in 
breastfed infant 

Promethazine Safe in usual dosage; monitor infant for drowsiness 
Propranolol Present in milk; safe in usual dosage; monitor 

infant 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 607 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Propylthiouracil Monitor infant’s thyroid status but amounts in milk 
probably too small to affect infant; high doses 
might affect neonatal thyroid function 

Pyrantel No information available 
Pyrazinamide Amount too small to be harmful 
Pyridostigmine Amount probably too small to be harmful 
Pyrimethamine Significant amount present in milk — avoid 

administration of other folate antagonists to infant; 
avoid breastfeeding during toxoplasmosis treatment 

Quinidine Significant amount present in milk but not known 
to be harmful 

Quinine Present in milk — continue breastfeeding and 
monitor infant; risk of haemolysis in G6PD-
deficient infants 

Ranitidine Significant amount present in milk, but not known 
to be harmful 

Retinol Theoretical risk of toxicity in infants of mothers 
taking large doses 

Ribavirin Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Rifampicin Amount too small to be harmful 
Ritonavir See Lopinavir + ritonavir 
Salbutamol Safe in usual dosage; monitor infant 
Saquinavir See section 6.4.2.3 
Senna Continue breastfeeding; monitor infant for 

diarrhoea 
Silver sulfadiazine Continue breastfeeding; monitor infant for 

jaundice—small risk of kernicterus in jaundiced 
infants particularly with long-acting sulphonamides, 
and of haemolysis in G6PD-deficient infants 

Simvastatin No information available — manufacturer advises 
avoid  

Sodium nitroprusside No information available 
Sodium valproate See Valproic acid 
Spectinomycin No information available 
Spironolactone Amount probably too small to be harmful 

608 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Stavudine See section 6.4.2.1 
Streptomycin Present in milk; continue breastfeeding; monitor 

infant for thrush and diarrhoea 
Sulfadiazine Monitor infant for jaundice—small risk of 

kernicterus in jaundiced infants and of haemolysis 
in G6PD-deficient infants; caution in ill or 
premature infants 

Sulfadoxine +  Monitor infant for jaundice—small risk of 
  pyrimethamine kernicterus in jaundiced infants and of haemolysis 

in G6PD-deficient infants (due to sulfadoxine); 
caution in ill or premature infants 

Sulfamethoxazole +  Monitor infant for jaundice—small risk of 
  trimethoprim kernicterus in jaundiced infants and of haemolysis 

in G6PD-deficient infants (due to 
sulfamethoxazole); caution in ill or premature 
infants 

Sulfasalazine Use with caution; monitor infant for jaundice—
small amounts in milk (one report of bloody 
diarrhoea and rash); theoretical risk of neonatal 
haemolysis especially in G6PD-deficient infants; 
caution in ill or premature infants 

Suxamethonium No information available 
Tamoxifen Suppresses lactation; avoid unless potential benefit 

outweighs risk 
Tenofovir Breastfeeding recommended during first 6 months 

if no safe alternative to breast milk 
Testosterone Avoid; may cause masculinization in the female 

infant or precocious development in the male 
infant; high doses suppress lactation 

Tetracaine No information available 
Tetracycline Continue breastfeeding; use alternative drug if 

possible (absorption and therefore discoloration of 
teeth in infant probably usually prevented by 
chelation with calcium in milk) 

Thiamine Severely thiamine-deficient mothers should avoid 
breastfeeding as toxic methylglyoxal excreted in 
milk 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 609 



Appendix 3: Breastfeeding 

Medicine Comment 

Thiopental Present in milk—not known to be harmful 
Trimethoprim Present in milk; safe in usual dosage; monitor 

infant 
Vaccine, Influenza Not known to be harmful 
Valproic acid Amount too small to be harmful 
Vancomycin Present in milk—significant absorption following 

oral administration unlikely 
Vecuronium No information available 
Verapamil Amount too small to be harmful 
Vinblastine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Vincristine Breastfeeding contraindicated 
Warfarin Risk of haemorrhage; increased by vitamin K 

deficiency; warfarin appears safe 
Zidovudine See section 6.4.2.1 
 

610 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

 
Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Reduced renal function may cause problems with drug therapy for the 
following reasons:  
1. The failure to excrete a drug or its metabolites may produce toxicity.  
2. The sensitivity to some drugs is increased even if the renal elimination 

is unimpaired.  
3. The tolerance to adverse effects may be impaired.  
4. The efficacy of some drugs may diminish.  

The dosage of many drugs must be adjusted in patients with renal impairment 
to avoid adverse reactions and to ensure efficacy. The level of renal function 
below which the dose of a drug must be reduced depends on how toxic it is 
and whether it is eliminated entirely by renal excretion or is partly metabolized 
to inactive metabolites.  
In general, all patients with renal impairment are given a loading dose which is 
the same as the usual dose for a patient with normal renal function. Maintenance 
doses are adjusted to the clinical situation. The maintenance dose of a drug can 
be reduced either by reducing the individual dose leaving the normal interval 
between doses unchanged or by increasing the interval between doses without 
changing the dose. The interval extension method may provide the benefits of 
convenience and decreased cost, while the dose reduction method provides a 
more constant plasma concentration.  
The following table lists drugs, in alphabetical order, for which specific 
information on use in renal impairment (including recommended doses) is 
available. Many drugs should be used with caution in renal impairment but no 
specific advice on dose adjustment is available; it is therefore important to also 
refer to the individual drug entries. The recommendations are given for 
various levels of renal function as estimated by the glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR), usually measured by the creatinine clearance (best calculated from a 24-
hour urine collection). The serum creatinine concentration is sometimes used 
instead as a measure of renal function but it is only a rough guide even when 
corrected for age, sex and weight by special nomograms.  
Renal impairment is usually divided into 3 grades: 

• Mild: GFR, 20–50 ml/minute or approximate serum creatinine, 150–
300 micromol/litre 

• Moderate: GFR, 10–20 ml/minute or serum creatinine, 300–
700 micromol/litre 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 611 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

• Severe: GFR, <10 ml/minute or serum creatinine, 
>700 micromol/litre 

When using the dosage guidelines the following must be considered: 

-    Drug prescribing should be kept to a minimum. 

-   Nephrotoxic drugs should, if possible, be avoided in all patients with renal 
disease because the nephrotoxicity is more likely to be serious.  

-     It is advisable to determine renal function not only before but also during 
the period of treatment and adjust the maintenance dose as necessary.  

-   Renal function (GFR, creatinine clearance) declines with age so that by 
the age of 80 it is half that in healthy young subjects. When prescribing 
for the elderly, assume at least a mild degree of renal impairment.  

-  Uraemic patients should be observed carefully for unexpected drug 
toxicity. In these patients the complexity of clinical status as well as other 
variables for example altered absorption, protein binding or metabolism, 
or liver function, and other drug therapy precludes use of fixed drug 
dosage and an individualized approach is required.  
 

Medicines to be avoided or used with caution in renal impairment 
 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Abacavir Severe Avoid 
Acetazolamide Mild Avoid; metabolic acidosis 
Acetylsalicylic acid Severe Avoid; sodium and water retention; 

deterioration in renal function; 
increased risk of gastrointestinal 
bleeding 

Aciclovir Mild Reduce intravenous dose 
  Moderate to Reduce dose 

severe 
Alcuronium Severe Prolonged duration of block 
Allopurinol Moderate 100–200 mg daily; increased toxicity; 

rash 
  Severe 100 mg on alternate days (maximum 

100 mg daily) 
 
 
 

612 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Aluminium hydroxide Severe Aluminium is absorbed and may 
accumulate 
NOTE. Absorption of aluminium from 
aluminium salts is increased by citrates 
which are contained in many 
effervescent preparations (such as 
effervescent analgesics) 

Amidotrizoate Mild Reduce dose and avoid dehydration; 
nephrotoxic 

Amiloride Mild Monitor plasma potassium; high risk of 
hyperkalaemia in renal impairment; 
excreted by kidney unchanged 

  Moderate Avoid 
Amoxicillin Mild to Risk of crystalluria with high doses 

moderate 
  Severe Reduce dose; rash more common and 

risk of crystalluria 
Amoxicillin +   Risk of crystalluria with high doses 
  clavulanic acid (particularly during parenteral therapy); 

reduce dose if creatinine clearance less 
than 30 ml/minute 

Amphotericin B Mild Use only if no alternative; 
nephrotoxicity may be reduced with use 
of lipid formulations 

Ampicillin Severe Reduce dose; rash more common 
Artemether +   Severe Caution; monitor ECG and plasma 
  Lumefantrine potassium 
Atenolol Mild to Reduce dose to a maximum 50 mg daily 

moderate if creatinine clearance 15–35 ml/minute 
  Severe May reduce renal blood flow and 

adversely affect renal function; reduce 
dose to a maximum 25 mg daily if 
creatinine clearance less than 
15 ml/minute 

Azathioprine Severe Reduce dose 
Benzathine Severe Neurotoxicity—high doses may cause 
   benzylpenicillin convulsions 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 613 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Benzylpenicillin Severe Maximum, 6 g daily; neurotoxicity—
high doses may cause convulsions 

Bleomycin Moderate Reduce dose 
Carbamazepine   Manufacturer advises caution 
Cefazolin Moderate Reduce dose 
Cefixime Moderate Reduce dose 
Ceftazidime Mild Reduce dose 
Ceftriaxone Severe Maximum, 2 g daily; also monitor 

plasma concentration if both severe 
renal impairment and hepatic 
impairment 

Chlorambucil Moderate Use with caution and monitor 
response; increased risk of 
myelosuppression 

Chloramphenicol Severe Avoid unless no alternative; dose-
related depression of haematopoiesis 

Chloroquine Mild to Reduce dose in rheumatic disease 
moderate 

  Severe Reduce dose for malaria prophylaxis; 
avoid in rheumatic disease 

Chlorphenamine Severe Dose reduction may be required 
Chlorpromazine Severe Start with small doses; increased 

cerebral sensitivity 
Ciclosporin   Monitor kidney function—dose- 

dependent increase in serum creatinine 
and urea during first few weeks may 
necessitate dose reduction (exclude 
rejection if kidney transplant) 

Ciprofloxacin Moderate Use half normal dose 
Cisplatin Mild Avoid if possible; nephrotoxic and 

neurotoxic 
Clindamycin   Plasma half-life prolonged—may need 

dose reduction 
Cloxacillin Severe Reduce dose 
Codeine Moderate to Reduce dose or avoid; increased and 

severe prolonged effect; increased cerebral 

614 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

sensitivity 
Cyclophosphamide   Reduce dose 
Dacarbazine Mild to Dose reduction may be required 

moderate 
  Severe Avoid 
Daunorubicin Mild to Reduce dose 

moderate 
Deferoxamine   Metal complexes excreted by kidneys 

(in severe renal impairment dialysis 
increases rate of elimination) 

Diazepam Severe Start with small doses; increased 
cerebral sensitivity 

Didanosine Mild Reduce dose; consult manufacturer's 
literature 

Diethylcarbamazine Moderate to Reduce dose; plasma half-life 
severe prolonged and urinary excretion 

considerably reduced 
Digoxin Mild Reduce dose; toxicity increased by 

electrolyte disturbances 
Dimercaprol   Discontinue or use with extreme 

caution if impairment develops during 
treatment 

Doxycycline Mild Use with caution; avoid excessive doses 
Efavirenz Severe No information available; caution 

advised 
Eflornithine   Reduce dose 
Emtricitabine Mild Reduce dose; consult manufacturer's 

literature 
Enalapril Mild Use with caution and monitor 

response; initial dose, 2.5 mg once daily 
if creatinine clearance less than 
30 ml/minute; hyperkalaemia and other 
adverse effects more common 

Ephedrine Severe Avoid; increased CNS toxicity 
Ergometrine Severe Manufacturer advises avoid 
Erythromycin Severe Maximum, 1.5 g daily (ototoxicity) 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 615 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Ethambutol Mild Reduce dose; if creatinine clearance less 
than 30 ml/minute monitor plasma 
ethambutol concentration; optic nerve 
damage 

Etoposide   Consider dose reduction 
Fluconazole Mild to Usual initial dose then halve subsequent 

moderate doses 
Flucytosine   Reduce dose and monitor plasma 

flucytosine concentration; consult 
manufacturer’s literature 

Fluphenazine Severe Start with small doses; increased 
cerebral sensitivity 

Furosemide Moderate May need high doses; deafness may 
follow rapid intravenous injection 

Gentamicin Mild Reduce dose; monitor plasma 
concentrations; see section 6.2.2 

Glibenclamide Severe Avoid 
Haloperidol Severe Start with small doses; increased 

cerebral sensitivity 
Heparin Severe Risk of bleeding increased 
Hydralazine Mild Reduce dose if creatinine clearance less 

than 30 ml/minute 
Hydrochlorothiazide Moderate Avoid; ineffective 
Ibuprofen Mild Use lowest effective dose and monitor 

renal function; sodium and water 
retention; deterioration in renal 
function possibly leading to renal 
failure 

  Moderate to Avoid 
severe 

Imipenem + cilastatin Mild Reduce dose 
Insulins Severe May need dose reduction; insulin 

requirements fall; compensatory 
response to hypoglycaemia is impaired 

Iohexol Moderate to Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; avoid 
severe dehydration 

616 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Isoniazid Severe Maximum, 200 mg daily; peripheral 
neuropathy 

Lamivudine Mild Reduce dose; consult manufacturer's 
literature 

Lidocaine Severe Caution 
Lithium Mild Avoid if possible or reduce dose and 

monitor plasma concentration carefully 
  Moderate Avoid 
Lopinavir + ritonavir    Avoid oral solution due to propylene 

glycol content; use capsules with 
caution in severe impairment 

Magnesium hydroxide Moderate Avoid or reduce dose; increased risk of 
toxicity 

Magnesium sulfate Moderate Avoid or reduce dose; increased risk of 
toxicity 

Mannitol   Avoid unless test dose produces 
diuretic response 

Meglumine   See Pentavalent antimony compounds 
  antimoniate 
Meglumine iotroxate Moderate to Increased risk of nephrotoxicity; avoid 

severe dehydration 
Mercaptopurine Moderate Reduce dose 
Metformin Mild Avoid; increased risk of lactic acidosis 
Methadone Moderate to Increased and prolonged effect; 

severe increased cerebral sensitivity 
Methotrexate Mild Reduce dose; accumulates; nephrotoxic 
  Moderate Avoid 
Methyldopa Moderate Start with small dose; increased 

sensitivity to hypotensive and sedative 
effects 

Metoclopramide Severe Avoid or use small dose; increased risk 
of extrapyramidal reactions 

Morphine Moderate to Reduce dose or avoid; increased and 
severe prolonged effect; increased cerebral 

sensitivity 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 617 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Nelfinavir   No information available; manufacturer 
advises caution 

Neostigmine Moderate May need dose reduction 
Nitrofurantoin Mild Avoid; peripheral neuropathy; 

ineffective because of inadequate urine 
concentrations 

Paromomycin Mild Avoid 
Penicillamine Mild Reduce dose and monitor renal 

function 
  Moderate to Avoid 

severe 
Pentamidine isetionate Mild Reduce dose; consult manufacturer’s 

literature 
Pentavalent antimony Moderate Increased adverse effects 
compounds 
  Severe Avoid 
Phenobarbital Severe Avoid large doses 
Polyvidone iodine Severe Avoid regular application to inflamed 

or broken mucosa 
Potassium chloride Moderate Avoid routine use; high risk of 

hyperkalaemia 
Procainamide Mild Avoid or reduce dose 
Procaine Severe Neurotoxicity—high doses may cause 
  benzylpenicillin convulsions 
Procarbazine Severe Avoid 
Proguanil Mild 100 mg once daily 
  Moderate 50 mg on alternate days 
  Severe 50 mg once weekly; increased risk of 

haematological toxicity 
Propranolol Severe Start with small dose; higher plasma 

concentrations after oral 
administration; may reduce renal blood 
flow and adversely affect renal function 

Propylthiouracil Mild to Use three quarters normal dose 
moderate 

618 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

  Severe Use half normal dose 
Pyridostigmine Moderate Reduce dose; excreted by kidney 
Pyrimethamine   Use with caution 
Quinine   Reduce parenteral maintenance dose 

for malaria treatment 
Ranitidine Severe Use half normal dose; occasional risk of 

confusion 
Ribavirin Mild Plasma ribavirin concentration 

increased; avoid if creatinine clearance 
less than 30 ml/minute; monitor 
haemoglobin concentration carefully 

Ritonavir   See Lopinavir + ritonavir 
Saquinavir Severe Dose adjustment possibly required 
Simvastatin Mild Use doses above 10 mg daily with 

caution if creatinine clearance less than 
30 ml/minute 

Sodium chloride Severe Avoid 
Sodium hydrogen Severe Avoid; specialized role in some forms 
  carbonate of renal disease 
Sodium nitroprusside Moderate Avoid prolonged use 
Sodium valproate   See Valproic acid 
Spironolactone Mild Monitor plasma potassium 

concentrations; high risk of 
hyperkalaemia in renal impairment 

  Moderate Avoid 
Stavudine Mild 20 mg twice daily (15 mg if body weight 

less than 60 kg) 
  Moderate to 20 mg once daily (15 mg if body weight 

severe less than 60 kg) 
Streptomycin Mild Reduce dose; monitor plasma 

concentrations 
Sulfadiazine Severe Avoid; high risk of crystalluria 

 
 
 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 619 



Appendix 4: Renal impairment 

Medicine Degree of Comment 
impairment 

Sulfamethoxazole + Mild Use half normal dose if creatinine 
  trimethoprim clearance 15–30 ml/minute; avoid if 

creatinine clearance less than 
15 ml/minute and if plasma 
sulfamethoxazole concentration cannot 
be monitored 

Sulfasalazine Moderate Risk of toxicity including crystalluria—
ensure high fluid intake 

  Severe Avoid 
Tenofovir Mild Increase dose interval; consult 

manufacturer's literature 
Trimethoprim Mild Use half normal dose after 3 days if 

creatinine clearance 15–30 ml/minute 
  Moderate to Use half normal dose if creatinine 

severe clearance less than 15 ml/minute; avoid 
if creatinine clearance less than 
10 ml/minute (unless plasma 
trimethoprim concentration monitored) 

Valproic acid Mild to Reduce dose 
moderate 

  Severe Alter dosage according to free serum 
valproic acid concentration 

Vancomycin Mild Reduce dose; monitor plasma 
vancomycin concentration and renal 
function regularly 

Warfarin Severe Avoid 
Zidovudine Severe Reduce dose; manufacturer advises oral 

dose of 300–400 mg daily in divided 
doses or intravenous dose of 1 mg/kg  
3–4 times daily 

   
   
   
  

620 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

 
Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

Liver disease may alter the response to drugs. However, the hepatic reserve 
appears to be large and liver disease has to be severe before important changes 
in drug metabolism take place. The ability to eliminate a specific drug may or 
may not correlate with the liver’s synthetic capacity for substances such as 
albumin or clotting factors, which tends to decrease as hepatic function 
declines. Unlike renal disease, where estimates of renal function based on 
creatinine clearance correlate with parameters of drug elimination such as 
clearance and half-life, routine liver function tests do not reflect actual liver 
function but are rather markers of liver cellular damage.  
The altered response to drugs in liver disease can include all or some of the 
following changes:  

• Impaired intrinsic hepatic eliminating (metabolizing) capacity due to 
lack of or impaired function of hepatocytes.  

• Impaired biliary elimination due to biliary obstruction or transport 
abnormalities (for example, rifampicin is excreted in the bile 
unchanged and may accumulate in patients with intrahepatic or 
extrahepatic obstructive jaundice).  

• Impaired hepatic blood flow due to surgical shunting, collateral 
circulation or poor perfusion with cirrhosis and portal hypertension.  

• Altered volume of distribution of drugs due to increased extracellular 
fluid (ascites, oedema) and decreased muscle mass.  

• Decreased protein binding and increased toxicity of drugs highly 
bound to proteins (for example phenytoin) due to impaired albumin 
production.  

• Increased bioavailability through decreased first-pass metabolism.  
• Decreased bioavailability due to malabsorption of fats in cholestatic 

liver disease.  

In severe liver disease increased sensitivity to the effects of some drugs can 
further impair cerebral function and may precipitate hepatic encephalopathy (for 
example, morphine). Oedema and ascites in chronic liver disease may be 
exacerbated by drugs that cause fluid retention (for example, acetylsalicylic acid, 
ibuprofen, prednisolone, dexamethasone).  
Usually drugs are metabolized without injury to the liver. A few drugs cause 
dose-related hepatotoxicity. However, most hepatotoxic reactions to drugs are 
rare but tend to be unpredictable. In patients with impaired liver function, the 
dose-related hepatotoxic reaction may occur at lower doses and the 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 621 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

unpredictable reactions seem to occur more frequently. Both should be 
avoided.  
Information to help prescribing in hepatic impairment is included in the 
following table. The table contains only those drugs that need dose adjustment. 
However, absence from the table does not automatically imply safety as for 
many drugs data about safety are absent; it is therefore important to also refer 
to the individual drug entries.  
Medicines to be avoided or used with caution in liver disease   

Medicine Comment 

Abacavir Avoid in moderate hepatic impairment unless essential; 
avoid in severe hepatic impairment 

Acetylsalicylic acid Avoid in severe hepatic impairment — increased risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding 

Alcuronium Possibly slower onset, higher dose requirement and 
prolonged recovery time 

Allopurinol Reduce dose 

Aluminium hydroxide In patients with fluid retention, avoid antacids 
containing large amounts of sodium; also avoid those 
causing constipation (can precipitate coma) 

Amidotrizoate Use with caution in severe hepatic impairment 

Amitriptyline Sedative effect increased (avoid in severe liver disease) 

Amlodipine Half-life prolonged — may need dose reduction; 
consider initial dose of 2.5 mg 

Amodiaquine Avoid 

Amoxicillin +  Monitor liver function in liver disease; cholestatic 
  clavulanic acid jaundice reported either during or shortly after 

treatment — more common in patients over the age of 
65 years and in males; duration of treatment should not 
usually exceed 14 days 

Artemether +    Caution in severe impairment — monitor ECG and 
  lumefantrine plasma potassium 

Azathioprine May need dose reduction 

Azithromycin Avoid; jaundice reported 

Bupivacaine Avoid (or reduce dose) in severe liver disease 

622 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

Medicine Comment 

Carbamazepine Metabolism impaired in advanced liver disease 

Ceftriaxone Reduce dose and monitor plasma concentration if both 
hepatic and severe renal impairment 

Chlorambucil Limited information available — consider dose 
reduction in severe hepatic impairment 

Chloramphenicol Avoid if possible — increased risk of bone marrow 
depression; reduce dose and monitor plasma 
chloramphenicol concentration 

Chlorphenamine Sedation inappropriate in severe liver disease — avoid 

Chlorpromazine Can precipitate coma; hepatotoxic 

Ciclosporin May need dose adjustment 

Clindamycin Reduce dose 

Clomifene Avoid in severe liver disease 

Clomipramine Sedative effects increased; avoid in severe liver disease 

Cloxacillin Cholestatic jaundice may occur up to several weeks 
after treatment has been stopped; administration for 
more than 2 weeks and increasing age are risk factors 

Codeine Avoid or reduce dose — may precipitate coma 

Contraceptives, Oral Avoid in active liver disease and if history of pruritus or 
cholestasis during pregnancy 

Cyclophosphamide Reduce dose 

Cytarabine Reduce dose 

Dacarbazine Dose reduction may be required in mild to moderate 
liver disease; avoid if severe 

Daunorubicin Reduce dose 

Diazepam Can precipitate coma 

Didanosine Insufficient information but monitor for toxicity 

Doxorubicin Reduce dose according to bilirubin concentration 

Doxycycline Avoid (or use with caution) 
 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 623 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

Medicine Comment 

Efavirenz In mild to moderate liver disease, monitor for dose-
related side-effects (for example, CNS effects) and 
monitor liver function; avoid in severe hepatic 
impairment 

Enalapril Closely monitor liver function in patients with hepatic 
impairment 

Ergometrine Avoid in severe liver disease 

Erythromycin May cause idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity 

Estradiol cypionate Avoid; see also Contraceptives, Oral 

Ethinylestradiol Avoid; see also Contraceptives, Oral 

Etoposide Avoid in severe hepatic impairment 

Fluconazole Toxicity with related drugs 

Fluorouracil Caution advised; dose reduction may be required 

Fluoxetine Reduce dose or administer on alternate days 

Fluphenazine Can precipitate coma; hepatotoxic 

Furosemide Hypokalaemia may precipitate coma (use potassium-
sparing diuretic to prevent this); increased risk of 
hypomagnesaemia in alcoholic cirrhosis 

Glibenclamide Increased risk of hypoglycaemia in severe liver disease; 
avoid or use small dose; can produce jaundice 

Griseofulvin Avoid in severe liver disease 

Haloperidol Can precipitate coma 

Halothane Avoid if history of unexplained pyrexia or jaundice 
following previous exposure to halothane 

Heparin Reduce dose in severe liver disease 

Hydralazine Reduce dose 

Hydrochlorothiazide Avoid in severe liver disease; hypokalaemia may 
precipitate coma (potassium-sparing diuretic can 
prevent this); increased risk of hypomagnesaemia in 
alcoholic cirrhosis 
 

624 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

Medicine Comment 

Ibuprofen Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and can cause 
fluid retention; avoid in severe liver disease 

Indinavir Increased risk of nephrolithiasis; reduce dose to 600 mg 
every 8 hours in mild to moderate hepatic impairment; 
not studied in severe impairment 

Isoniazid Use with caution; monitor liver function regularly and 
particularly frequently in the first 2 months; see section 
6.2.4 

Levonorgestrel Caution in active liver disease and recurrent cholestatic 
jaundice 

Lidocaine Avoid (or reduce dose) in severe liver disease 

Lopinavir + ritonavir Avoid oral solution because of propylene glycol 
content; avoid capsules in severe hepatic impairment 

Magnesium hydroxide Avoid in hepatic coma if risk of renal failure 

Magnesium sulfate Avoid in hepatic coma if risk of renal failure 

Medroxyprogesterone Avoid in active liver disease and if history of pruritus 
  acetate during pregnancy 

Mefloquine Avoid for prophylaxis in severe liver disease 

Meglumine See Pentavalent antimony compounds 
antimoniate 

Mercaptopurine May need dose reduction 

Metformin Withdraw if tissue hypoxia likely—manufacturers 
advise avoid 

Methadone Avoid or reduce dose—may precipitate coma 

Methotrexate Dose-related toxicity; avoid in non-malignant 
conditions (for example, rheumatic disorders); avoid for 
all indications in severe hepatic impairment 

Methyldopa Manufacturer advises caution in history of liver disease; 
avoid in active liver disease 

Metoclopramide Reduce dose 

Metronidazole In severe liver disease, reduce total daily dose to one 
third and give once daily 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 625 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

Medicine Comment 

Morphine Avoid or reduce dose—may precipitate coma 

Nelfinavir No information available; manufacturer advises caution 

Nevirapine Caution in moderate hepatic impairment; avoid in 
severe hepatic impairment; see section 6.4.2.2 

Nifedipine Reduce dose in severe liver disease 

Nitrofurantoin Cholestatic jaundice and chronic active hepatitis 
reported 

Norethisterone Avoid in active liver disease and if history of pruritus or 
cholestasis during pregnancy 

Ofloxacin Hepatic dysfunction reported; reduce dose in severe 
liver disease 

Paracetamol Dose-related toxicity—avoid large doses 

Pentavalent antimony Increased risk of liver damage and hepatic failure in 
  compounds pre-existing liver disease 

Phenobarbital May precipitate coma 

Phenytoin Reduce dose to avoid toxicity 

Prednisolone Adverse effects more common 

Procainamide Avoid or reduce dose 

Procarbazine Avoid in severe hepatic impairment 

Promethazine Avoid—may precipitate coma in severe liver disease; 
hepatotoxic 

Propranolol Reduce oral dose 

Propylthiouracil Reduce dose; see section 18.8 

Pyrazinamide Monitor hepatic function—idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity 
more common; avoid in severe hepatic impairment; see 
section 6.2.4 

Pyrimethamine Use with caution 

Ranitidine Increased risk of confusion; reduce dose 

Ribavirin Avoid in severe hepatic dysfunction or decompensated 
cirrhosis 

626 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Appendix 5: Hepatic impairment 

Medicine Comment 

Rifampicin Impaired elimination; monitor liver function; avoid or 
do not exceed 8 mg/kg daily; see section 6.2.4 

Ritonavir See Lopinavir + ritonavir 

Saquinavir Manufacturer advises caution in moderate hepatic 
impairment; avoid in severe impairment 

Simvastatin Avoid in active liver disease or unexplained persistent 
elevations in serum transaminases 

Sodium nitroprusside Avoid in severe liver disease 

Sodium valproate See Valproic acid 

Sulfadiazine Avoid if severe 

Sulfamethoxazole + Manufacturer advises avoid in severe liver disease 
  trimethoprim 

Suxamethonium Prolonged apnoea may occur in severe liver disease due 
to reduced hepatic synthesis of plasma cholinesterase 

Testosterone Preferably avoid—possibility of dose-related toxicity 
and fluid retention 

Thiopental Reduce dose for induction in severe liver disease 

Valproic acid Avoid if possible—hepatotoxicity and hepatic failure 
may occasionally occur (usually in first 6 months) 

Verapamil Reduce oral dose 

Vinblastine Dose reduction may be necessary 

Vincristine Dose reduction may be necessary 

Warfarin Avoid in severe liver disease, especially if prothrombin 
time already prolonged 

Zidovudine Accumulation may occur 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 627 



Index 

Index 
Amphotericin B....... 145,  Anti-infective  

146, 181, 182 medicines....... 80, 298 
A Ampicillin..........100, 103 Anti-inflammatory 

Anaemia .................... 247 medicines..... 301, 344 
Anaesthetics................ 15 Antileishmaniasis 

Abacavir.....................162 
Analgesics.................... 30 medicines..............180 

Abbreviations............... vi 
Anaphylaxis................. 47 Antileprosy  

Acetazolamide...........439 
Androgens................. 358 medicines..............130 

Acetylcysteine........58, 60 
Angiostrongyliasis ...... 84 Antimalarial  

Acetylsalicylic  
Anisakiasis................... 84 medicines..............186 

acid...................31, 33,  
Antacids..................... 336 Antimetabolites .........226 

216, 291, 291 
Anthelminthics ........... 81 Antimigraine  

Aciclovir ............152, 434 
Antiallergics ................ 47 medicines..............214 

Acne vulgaris.............305 
Antiamoebic  Antineoplastic  

Actinic keratosis........307 
medicines............. 178 medicines..............227 

Adherence (compliance) 
Antianaemia  Antineoplastic  

with drug  
medicines............. 247 medicines..............219 

treatment.................. 6 
Antianginal  Antioxytocics.... 443, 450 

Adrenal hormones....354 
medicines............. 263 Antiparkinsonism 

Adrenal  
Antiarrhythmic medicines..............241 

suppression ..........355 
medicines............. 268 Anti-pneumocystosis 

Adrenaline, see 
Antiasthmatic  medicines..............204 

Epinephrine)..........26 
medicines............. 474 Antiprotozoal  

Adverse effects and 
Antibacterials ...... 96, 113 medicines..............178 

interactions .............. 9 
Anticholinergic Antipruritic  

African trypano- 
(antimuscarinic) medicines..............301 

somiasis ................207 
bronchodilators... 481 Antipyretics..................30 

Albendazole................82,  
Anticoagulants in Antiretrovirals ...........154 

83, 84, 85 
pregnancy ............ 253 Antischistosomal 

Alcuronium ...............427 
Anticonvulsants.......... 67 medicines................94 

Alkylating  
Anti-D immunoglobulin Antiseptics ........ 320, 321 

medicines .............225 
(human)................ 395 Antitetanus 

Allergic emergencies...49 
Antidiabetic agents... 377 immunoglobulin 

Allopurinol ..................39 
Antidiabetic, Oral..... 382 (human) ................396 

Aluminium  
Antidiarrhoeal Antithrombotic 

diacetate................304 
(symptomatic) medicines..............289 

Aluminium  
medicines............. 351 Antithyroid  

hydroxide .............338 
Antidotes..................... 55 medicines..............388 

Aluminium overload ..59 
Antiemetic  Antitoxoplasmosis 

American 
medicines............. 341 medicines..............204 

trypanosomiasis...211 
Antiepileptics .............. 67 Antitrematode  

Amidotrizoate ...........316 
Antifilarials .................. 89 medicines................94 

Amikacin....................137 
Antifungal  Antitrypanosomal 

Amiloride...................330 
medicines.....144, 295 medicines..............207 

Amitriptyline .............461 
Antigiardiasis  Antituberculosis 

Amlodipine................277 
medicines............. 178 medicines..............134 

Amodiaquine.....190, 191 
Antiherpes  Antiulcer  

Amoebiasis ................178 
medicines............. 151 medicines..............336 

Amoxicillin ........100, 101 
Antihormones........... 236 Antivenom 

Amoxicillin + clavulanic 
Antihypertensive immunoglobulins.396 

acid........................102 
medicines............. 275 Antiviral medicines ...151 

628 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Index 

Antivirals ...................176 Bradyarrhythmias ..... 269 Cisplatin .....................230 
Anxiety.......................468 Breastfeeding ............ 599 Clavulanic  
Artemether ................192 Bupivacaine................. 23 acid............... 100, 102 
Artemether + Clindamycin...............118 

lumefantrine.........192 Clofazimine................132 
Artesunate .................193 Clomifene ..................385 
Ascariasis .....................82 C Clomipramine............470 
Ascorbic acid.............497 Clotrimazole ..... 145, 147 
Asparaginase..............228 Caffeine citrate ......... 485 Cloxacillin ... 98, 100, 110 
Aspirin, see Calamine lotion ........ 303 Coagulation, Medicines 

Acetylsalicylic  Calcium folinate ....... 229 affecting................251 
acid........................290 Calcium  Coal tar.......................308 

Asthma.......................474 gluconate........ 61, 497 Codeine ......... 36, 37, 352 
Astringent  Candidosis................. 296 Colitis, ulcerative.......344 

medicines .............304 Capillariasis ................. 82 Condoms ...................372 
Atenolol .... 265, 269, 278 Capreomycin............. 137 Contraceptives.. 353, 360 
Atrial fibrillation .......268 Carbamate  Contraceptives, 
Atrial flutter...............268 poisoning ............... 59 Combined oral .....360 
Atropine................26, 59,  Carbamazepine .......... 69,  Contraceptives, 

60, 441 71, 465 Emergency .. 362, 371 
Azathioprine........42, 220 Carbapenems ............ 101 Contraceptives, 
Azithromycin ............113 Carbidopa.................. 244 Implantable ..........373 

Cardiac arrest ............ 269 Contraceptives, 
Cardiovascular Injectable ..............368 

B medicines............. 262 Contraceptives,  
Cefazolin ...........100, 106 Oral .......................360 
Cefixime ............101, 107 Contraceptives, 

Bacitracin...................299 Ceftazidime.......101, 108 Progestogen- 
Barium sulfate ...........317 Ceftriaxone........101, 109 only .......................362 
Barrier methods ........372 Cephalosporins......... 100 Convulsive  
BCG vaccine .............400 Cestode infections...... 81 disorders .................69 
Beclometasone..........482 Changes ...................... viii Copper-containing 
Benzathine benzyl- Charcoal, activated..... 57 device....................371 

penicillin .........98, 104 Chlorambucil ............ 230 Corticosteroids.........220,  
Benznidazole .............212 Chloramphenicol...... 114 236, 345, 354,  
Benzoic acid +  Chlorhexidine ........... 321 355, 357, 378,  

salicylic acid .........296 Chlorine base 436, 480, 481 
Benzoyl peroxide ......307 compound ........... 324 Crohn disease ............344 
Benzyl benzoate........311 Chloroquine ............... 41,  Cutaneous larva  
Benzyl- 43, 189, 190, 194,  migrans ...................84 

penicillin .. 11, 98, 105 199, 200 Cyanide poisoning ......60 
Benzylpenicillins .........99 Chloroxylenol ........... 324 Cyclophosphamide ...230 
Beta Lactam  Chlorphenamine......... 51 Cycloserine ................138 

medicines ...............98 Chlorpromazine........ 457 Cytarabine..................231 
Beta2-adrenoceptor Cholera vaccine ........ 401 Cytomegalovirus .......152 

agonists.................479 Cholinesterase  Cytotoxic  
Betamethasone..........302 inhibitors.............. 425 antibiotics .............226 
Biperiden ...................243 Chronic obstructive Cytotoxic  
Bipolar disorders.......463 pulmonary  medicines..............223 
Bleomycin..................228 disease .................. 474 
Blood products .........256 Ciclosporin................ 221 
Blood, Medicines Cilastatin.................... 111 

affecting the .........246 Ciprofloxacin ............ 116 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 629 



Index 

Dopamine ................. 286 Ethosuximide ..............74 
D Doxorubicin.............. 232 Etoposide...................227 

Doxycycline ............. 119,  Etoposide...................233 
Dacarbazine...............231 191, 195, 200, 202 Eye infections............432 
Dactinomycin............232 Dracunculiasis............. 84 Eye, medicines...........314 
Dapsone.....................132 Dyspepsia.................. 338 
Daunorubicin ............232 
Deferoxamine .......59, 61 
Depressive  F 

disorders...............460 E 
Dermatitis, Atopic ....301 Factor IX complex 
Dermatitis,  Echinococcosis........... 81 concentrate...........259 

Contact.................301 Eclampsia.................... 71 Factor VIII  
Dermatitis,  Efavirenz...155, 160, 169 concentrate...........260 

Seborrhoeic..........302 Efavirenz + Ferrous salt ................249 
Dermatological emtricitabine + Ferrous salt +  

medicines .............294 tenofovir .............. 160 folic acid ...............250 
Dexamethasone .........51,  Eflornithine............... 208 Fixed-dose 

225, 236, 354 Electrolyte and water combinations .......160 
Dextran 70.................258 replacement ......... 486 Fluconazole ...... 145, 147 
Diabetic  Emergency Flucytosine........ 145, 149 

ketoacidosis..........381 contraception ..... 362, Fluke infections...........94 
Diagnostic  371 Fluorescein ................314 

agents............313, 393 Emesis ......................... 57 Fluorouracil ...... 233, 309 
Dialysis,  Emtricitabine ...157, 160, Fluoxetine ..................462 

Peritoneal .............452 164 Fluphenazine .............458 
Diaphragms.......147, 372 Emtricitabine + Folic acid....................250 
Diarrhoea...........348, 351 tenofovir .............. 160 Furosemide....... 288, 330 
Diazepam..............26, 27,  Enalapril ............279, 286 

73, 469 Endocrine  
Didanosine ................163 medicines............. 353 
Diethyl- Enterobiasis ................ 82 G 

carbamazine .....89, 91 Ephedrine.................... 24 
Digoxin ..............270, 285 Epilepsy, Control ....... 68 Gastric lavage ....... 56, 59 
Diloxanide .................179 Epinephrine  Gastrointestinal 
Dimercaprol ................62 (adrenaline)..... 26, 49,  medicines..............335 
Diphtheria and tetanus 50, 52, 271, 442, 483 Gastro-oesophageal 

vaccine..................403 Ergocalciferol ........... 498 reflux disease........338 
Diphtheria  Ergometrine.............. 445 General advice to 

antitoxin ...............397 Erythromycin....114, 120 prescribers ................1 
Diphtheria vaccine....402 Estradiol cypionate + General anaesthetics and 
Diphtheria, pertussis, medroxyprogesterone oxygen.....................16 

and tetanus  acetate .................. 368 Gentamicin ....... 121, 434 
vaccine..................403 Estrogens .................. 374 Gentian violet, see 

Diphyllobothriasis ......81 Ethambutol......138, 140, Methylrosanilinium 
Disease modifying 142, 143 chloride.................299 

agents used in Ethanol...................... 322 Giardiasis ...................179 
rheumatoid disorders Ethinylestradiol ........ 377 Glaucoma...................437 
(DMARDs) ............40 Ethinylestradiol + Glibenclamide ...........383 

Disinfectants .....320, 323 levonorgestrel...... 363 Glucose ......................490 
Dithranol ...................308 Ethinylestradiol + Glucose with sodium 
Diuretics ....................326 norethisterone ..... 365 chloride.................491 
DL-methionine ...........62 Ethionamide ............. 138 Glutaral ......................325 

630 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Index 

Glyceryl trinitrate......266 Imipenem +  
Gout.............................39 cilastatin ............... 111 L 
Gout.............................30 Immunoglobulins..... 394 
Griseofulvin ......145, 149 Immunologicals........ 392 Labour, Induction and 

Immunosuppressive augmentation .......444 
medicines............. 220 Labour, Premature....450 

Indinavir ............155, 172 
H Lamivudine160, 161, 165 

Influenza vaccine...... 407 Laxatives ....................347 
Inhalational gases ....... 17 Leukotriene receptor 

Haemophilia ..............253 Injectable hormonal antagonists............482 
Haemophilus influenzae contraceptives ..... 368 Levamisole............ 83, 86 

type b vaccine ......404 Insulins ......378, 383, 384 Levodopa +  
Haloperidol ...............459 Insulins ...................... 377 carbidopa..............244 
Halothane ....................18 Interactions ............... 503 Levonorgestrel . 363, 367 
Heart failure ..............283 Intestinal  Levothyroxine ...........389 
Heavy metal  anthelminthics....... 81 Lichen planus ............302 

poisoning................59 Intestinal nematode Lidocaine ............ 24, 272 
Heparin sodium ........253 infections ............... 82 Lidocaine + epinephrine 
Hepatic  Intraperitoneal dialysis (adrenaline).............26 

impairment...........621 solution ................ 453 Lipid-lowering  
Hepatitis A  Intrauterine  agents....................292 

vaccine..................405 devices.................. 370 Lithium carbonate.....466 
Hepatitis B  Intravenous agents ..... 16 Local anaesthetics .......21 

vaccine..................406 Introduction................ vii Loiasis ..........................89 
Herpes simplex virus  Iodine ........................ 499 Loop diuretics ...........327 

infections..............151 Iohexol ...................... 317 Lopinavir +  
Hookworm  Ipratropium  ritonavir ................173 

infections................82 bromide................ 483 Lumefantrine.............192 
Hormone replacement Iron overload.............. 59 Lymphatic filariasis .....90 

therapy..................374 Iron poisoning ............ 59 
Hormones..........236, 353 Isoniazid ...........139, 140,  
Human normal 142, 143, 500 

immunoglobulin..260 Isoniazid +  M 
Hydralazine ...............280 ethambutol .......... 140 
Hydro- Isosorbide dinitrate .. 266 Magnesium  

chlorothiazide.....281,  Ivermectin.................. 83,  hydroxide..............339 
288, 331 90, 92, 311 Magnesium  

Hydrocortisone..........11,  sulfate....... 71, 75, 277 
53, 236, 303, 345, 354 Malaria........................186 

Hydroxocobalamin...251 
Hymenolepiasis...........81 J Mannitol.....................332 

Measles vaccine .........409 
Hypertension.............276 Mebendazole ........ 83, 86 
Hypertensive Japanese encephalitis Medroxyprogesterone 

emergencies .........277 vaccine ................. 408 acetate .......... 369, 387 
Hypoglycaemia..........380 Mefloquine................190,  

196, 199, 202 

K Meglumine  

I antimoniate . 183, 184 
Meglumine  

Kanamycin ................ 140 iotroxate ...............318 
Ibuprofen ....................34 Ketamine..................... 19 Melarsoprol....... 208, 209 
Ichthyosis ..................302 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 631 



Index 

Meningococcal Non-nucleoside reverse P-aminosalicylic  
meningitis  transcriptase acid........................140 
vaccine..................411 inhibitors.............. 169 Panic attacks ..............470 

Mercaptopurine ........234 Non-steroidal anti- Paracetamol .. 32, 35, 217 
Metformin .................384 inflammatory Paracetamol  
Methadone.................471 medicines............... 31 overdosage 58, 60, 62 
Metha- Non-steroidal anti- Parkinsonism.... 241, 242 

emoglobinaemia ....60 inflammatory Paromomycin ............185 
Methotrexate ..............41,  medicines  Paroxysmal 

43, 227, 229, 234,  (NSAIMS).............. 30 supraventricular 
344, 345 Norethisterone .365, 387 tachycardia............269 

Methyldopa................282 Norethisterone  Pediculosis .................311 
Methylrosanilinium enantate................ 370 Penicillamine ..............41,  

chloride.................299 NSAIM-associated 44, 59, 64 
Methylthioninium ulcers .................... 337 Pentamidine..... 185, 186, 

chloride (methylene NSAIMs ...................... 31 205, 210 
blue)........................63 Nucleoside/Nucleotide Pentavalent antimony 

Metoclopramide........342 reverse transcriptase compounds ..........183 
Metronidazole ............84,  inhibitors.............. 162 Peptic ulcer ................336 

122, 179, 344 Nystatin .............146, 150 Permethrin.................312 
Miconazole ................297 Pertussis vaccine .......413 
Mifepristone..............445 Phenobarbital ....... 69, 76 
Minerals .....................497 Phenoxymethyl- 
Miotics and O penicillin ........ 99, 112 

antiglaucoma Phenytoin.....................77 
medicines .............437 Obsessive–compulsive Phytomenadione .......254 

Misoprostol .......445, 447 disorders .............. 470 Pilocarpine .................439 
Mood disorders.........460 Ofloxacin .................. 140 Pityriasis rosea ...........302 
Morphine........ 28, 36, 37 Onchocerciasis ........... 90 Pityriasis versicolor ...296 
Mumps vaccine.........412 Ophthalmic  Plasma fractions for 
Muscle relaxants........425 medicines............. 314 specific use ...........259 
Myasthenia gravis .....426 Ophthalmological Plasma substitutes.....257 
Mydriatics ..................441 preparations......... 432 Pneumococcal  
Myocardial  Opioid analgesic vaccine ..................414 

infarction..............289 overdosage....... 36, 58 Pneumocystosis.........204 
Opioid analgesics ....... 35 Podophyllum resin....309 
Oral rehydration....... 349 Poisonings ...................55 

N Oral rehydration  Poliomyelitis  
salts...............350, 487 vaccines ................414 

Organophosphate Polyvidone iodine .....322 
Naloxone ........ 36, 58, 63 poisoning ............... 59 Postpartum 
Nelfinavir...................174 Ovulation  haemorrhage ........444 
Neomycin sulfate + inducers................ 385 Potassium  

bacitracin..............299 Oxamniquine .............. 95 chloride........ 487, 491 
Neostigmine ..............428 Oxygen ........................ 20 Potassium ferric 
Nevirapine ................155,  Oxytocics .................. 443 hexacyanoferrate (II) 

160, 161, 170 Oxytocin.................... 448 2H20........................65 
Niclosamide.................87 Potassium  
Nicotinamide.............500 iodide ........... 151, 390 
Nifedipine..................450 Potassium  
Nifurtimox ................212 P permanganate.......300 
Nitrofurantoin...........124 Potassium-sparing 
Nitrous oxide ..............20 Palliative care ....219, 238 diuretics ................328 

632 WHO Model Formulary 2008 



Index 

Praziquantel................81,  Simvastatin.................293 
88, 94, 95 R Skin differentiation and 

Prednisolone ..............53,  proliferation .........305 
85, 237, 354, 436 Rabies immuno- Sleep disorders ..........468 

Pre-eclampsia ..............71 globulin ................ 398 Sodium calcium  
Pregnancy,  Rabies vaccine .......... 416 edetate.....................65 

Precautions in ......582 Radiocontrast  Sodium chloride........492 
Pregnancy,  media.................... 315 Sodium  

Termination .........444 Ranitidine .................. 340 cromoglicate.........481 
Preoperative  Renal impairment ..... 611 Sodium fluoride.........501 

medication..............26 Respiratory tract Sodium hydrogen 
Prescription .................12 medicines.....473, 485 carbonate..............492 
Primaquine ................196 Retinol ....................... 500 Sodium lactate, 
Prinzmetal angina .....265 Rheumatoid  compound  
Procainamide.............272 disorders ................ 30 solution.................493 
Procaine benzyl- Ribavirin .................... 176 Sodium nitrite..............65 

penicillin ...............113 Riboflavin.................. 501 Sodium  
Procarbazine..............234 Rifampicin................ 133,  nitroprusside ........283 
Progestogens .............386 141, 142, 143 Sodium thiosulfate.....66, 
Proguanil............200, 203 Rifampicin + 298 
Promethazine .............26,  isoniazid ............... 142 Sodium valproate ........78 

28, 342, 343 Rifampicin + isoniazid + Spectinomycin...........125 
Propranolol ...............218 ethambutol .......... 142 Spironolactone ..........333 
Propylthiouracil ........390 Rifampicin + isoniazid + Stable angina..............263 
Protamine sulfate......255 pyrazinamide ....... 143 Status epilepticus.........70 
Protease Rifampicin + isoniazid + Stavudine .......... 160, 166 

inhibitors ..............172 pyrazinamide + Stavudine + lamivudine 
Pruritus ......................301 ethambutol .......... 143 + nevirapine.........160 
Prussian blue ...............65 Ringworm ................. 295 Streptokinase .............291 
Psoriasis .....................305 Ritonavir................... 155,  Streptomycin .............144 
Psychotherapeutic 173, 175, 627 Stroke .........................290 

medicines .............454 Rotavirus vaccine ..... 418 Strongyloidiasis ...........83 
Psychotic  Rubella vaccine......... 419 Substance-dependence 

disorders...............455 programmes .........471 
Pulmonary disease, Sulfadiazine................126 

Chronic  Sulfadoxine + 
obstructive ...........479 S pyrimethamine.....198 

Pyrantel ........................89 Sulfamethoxazole + 
Pyrazinamide.....140, 143 Salbutamol ................ 484 trimethoprim.......127,  
Pyridostigmine ..........429 Salicylic acid ......296, 310 206 
Pyridoxine..................500 Sample prescription ... 14 Sulfasalazine ...............41,  
Pyrimethamine.........198,  Saquinavir.................. 175 45, 345, 346 

206 Scabicides and Suramin  

pediculicides ........ 311 sodium........... 93, 211 

Scabies ....................... 311 Suxamethonium ........430 

Q Schistosomiasis........... 94 
Sedation for short-term 

procedures ............. 26 
Quinidine...................273 T 

Selenium sulfide ....... 297 
Quinine ..............190, 197 Senna ......................... 348 

Sera and Taeniasis.......................81 
immunoglobulins 394 Tamoxifen .................238 

Silver sulfadiazine..... 300 Tenofovir ...................160 

WHO Model Formulary 2008 633 



Index 

Tenofovir disoproxil Urea ........................... 310 
fumarate ...............167 W 

Testosterone..............359 
Tetanus vaccine ........420 
Tetracaine ..................437 V Warfarin .....................255 

Warts ..........................307 
Tetracycline ...............435 Water for injection....493 
Thiamine....................502 Vaccines .................... 398 
Thiazide diuretics......328 Valproic acid ....... 78, 467 
Thiopental ...................21 Vancomycin .............. 129 
Thrombo- Varicella vaccine ....... 423 X 

embolism..............361 Varicella–zoster 
Thyroid  infections ............. 152 Xanthines...................480 

hormones .............388 Vecuronium .............. 431 
Timolol ......................440 Ventricular  
Tissue nematode tachycardia........... 269 

infections................84 Verapamil ..........267, 274 Y 
Toxoplasmosis ..........204 Vinblastine ................ 235 
Tremors .....................242 Vinca alkaloids.......... 227 Yellow fever  
Trichinellosis ...............84 Vincristine ................. 235 vaccine ..................424 
Trichomoniasis .........179 Visceral larva  
Trichostrongyliasis......83 migrans................... 85 
Trichuriasis ..................83 Vitamin A.................. 500 
Triclabendazole...........96 Vitamin B.................. 500 Z 
Trimethoprim....128, 206 Vitamin B  
Tropicamide ..............314 complex ............... 495 
Tuberculin, purified Zidovudine ...............155,  

Vitamin B1................. 502 
protein  161, 167 

Vitamin B2................. 501 
derivative..............393 Zidovudine + 

Vitamin B6................. 500 
Typhoid vaccine........421 lamivudine............161 

Vitamin C.................. 497 Zidovudine + 
Vitamin D2................ 498 lamivudine + 
Vitamin D3................ 496 nevirapine.............161 

U Vitamins .................... 495 Zinc sulfate................351 
Volatile inhalational Zollinger–Ellison 

agents ..................... 17 syndrome..............338 
Unstable angina.........264 

 

634 WHO Model Formulary 2008